[PAGE 1]
: Automatic “Differentiation” via Text
Mert Yuksekgonul1* MERTY @STANFORD .EDU
Federico Bianchi1* FEDE @STANFORD .EDU
Joseph Boen2* TBOEN @STANFORD .EDU
Sheng Liu2* SHENGL @STANFORD .EDU
Zhi Huang2* ZHIHUANG @STANFORD .EDU
Carlos Guestrin1,3 GUESTRIN @STANFORD .EDU
James Zou1,2,3 JAMESZ @STANFORD .EDU
1DEPARTMENT OF COMPUTER SCIENCE , STANFORD UNIVERSITY
2DEPARTMENT OF BIOMEDICAL DATA SCIENCE , STANFORD UNIVERSITY
3CHAN ZUCKERBERG BIOHUB
CORRESPONDENCE : MERTY @STANFORD .EDU AND JAMESZ @STANFORD .EDU
REPOSITORY AND TUTORIALS
Abstract
AI is undergoing a paradigm shift, with breakthroughs achieved by systems orchestrating
multiple large language models (LLMs) and other complex components. As a result, develop-
ing principled and automated optimization methods for compound AI systems is one of the
most important new challenges. Neural networks faced a similar challenge in its early days
until backpropagation and automatic differentiation transformed the field by making optimiza-
tion turn-key. Inspired by this, we introduce TEXT GRAD , a powerful framework performing
automatic “differentiation” via text. TEXT GRAD backpropagates textual feedback provided
by LLMs to improve individual components of a compound AI system. In our framework,
LLMs provide rich, general, natural language suggestions to optimize variables in computation
graphs, ranging from code snippets to molecular structures.TEXT GRAD follows PyTorch’s syn-
tax and abstraction and is flexible and easy-to-use. It works out-of-the-box for a variety of tasks,
where the users only provide the objective function without tuning components or prompts of
the framework. We showcase TEXT GRAD ’s effectiveness and generality across a diverse range
of applications, from question answering and molecule optimization to radiotherapy treatment
planning. Without modifying the framework, TEXT GRAD improves the zero-shot accuracy of
GPT-4o in Google-Proof Question Answering from 51% to 55%, yields 20% relative performance
gain in optimizing LeetCode-Hard coding problem solutions, improves prompts for reasoning,
designs new druglike small molecules with desirable in silico binding, and designs radiation
oncology treatment plans with high specificity. TEXT GRAD lays a foundation to accelerate the
development of the next-generation of AI systems.
1 Introduction
There is an emerging paradigm shift in how AI systems are built, owing to the breakthroughs of Large
Language Models (LLMs) [1–6]. The new generation of AI applications are increasingly compound systems
involving multiple sophisticated components, where each component could be an LLM-based agent, a
tool such as a simulator, or web search. For instance, a system of LLMs communicating with symbolic
solvers can solve olympiad-level math problems [7]; a system of LLMs using search engines and code
interpreter tools performs comparably to human competitive programmers [8] and are solving real-world
*Co-first authors.
1
arXiv:2406.07496v1  [cs.CL]  11 Jun 2024

[PAGE 2]
Automatic “Differentiation” via Text
GitHub issues [9]. However, many of these breakthroughs came from systems that are hand-crafted by
experts in the domain of application and are tweaked through heuristics. Therefore, developing principled
and automated ways to optimize AI systems is one of the most crucial challenges for building compound
systems with LLMs, and is necessary for unlocking the power of AI [10–12].
For the past 15 years, many advances in AI have relied on artificial neural networks and differen-
tiable optimization [7, 13–17]. Different parts of neural networks (e.g., two artificial neurons) communicate
through differentiable functions like matrix multiplications [18]. Therefore, using numerical gradients and
backpropagation [19], which provide the direction to adjust each parameter to improve a model, has been
the natural way to train AI models. Flexible automatic differentiation frameworks implementing backprop-
agation [20–24] have been indispensible to the development of AI models.
To optimize the new generation of AI systems, we introduce TEXT GRAD , automatic differentiation via
text. Here we use differentiation and gradients as a metaphor for textual feedback from LLMs. In this
framework, each AI system is transformed into a computation graph, where variables are inputs and out-
puts of complex (not necessarily differentiable) function calls. The feedback to the variables (dubbed ‘tex-
tual gradients’ [25]) are provided in the form of informative and interpretable natural language criticism
to the variables; describing how a variable should be changed to improve the system. The gradients are
propagated through arbitrary functions, such as LLM API calls, simulators, or external numerical solvers.
We demonstrate the power of our framework in a diverse set of domains, ranging from question an-
swering benchmarks to radiotherapy treatment plan optimization and molecule generation (Fig. 1). LLMs
can provide very rich, legible, and expressive natural language gradients to variables in this wide range of
domains, such as proposing modifications to molecules, prompts to other LLMs, and code snippets. Our
framework is built on the assumption that the current state-of-the-art LLMs are able to reason about indi-
vidual components and subtasks of the system that it tries to optimize. We demonstrate the flexibility of
TEXT GRAD with the following results:
1. Coding: In Section 3.1, we optimize solutions to difficult coding problems from LeetCode [26], where
we boost the performance of gpt-4o and best existing method by 20% relevant performance gain.
2. Problem Solving: In Section 3.2, we optimize solutions to complex scientific questions to improve
the zero-shot performance of GPT-4o. For instance, in Google-Proof Question Answering [27] bench-
mark, we improve the zero-shot accuracy from 51% to 55% by refining the solutions at test-time.
3. Reasoning: In Section 3.3, we optimize prompts to improve the LLM performance, where we push
the performance of GPT-3.5 close to GPT-4 in several reasoning tasks.
4. Chemistry: In Section 3.4, we design new small molecules with desirable druglikeness and in silico
binding affinity to drug targets.
5. Medicine: In Section 3.5, we optimize radiation treatment plans for prostate cancer patients to
achieve desirable target dosage and reduce side effects.
Our results in a broad set of applications demonstrate the promise ofTEXT GRAD to automatically opti-
mize compound AI systems via backpropagation of text feedback. To accelerate progress in this direction,
we open-source our framework at https://github.com/zou-group/textgrad.
2 T EXT GRAD : Optimizing AI systems by backpropagating text feed-
back
Below we first describe a example to demonstrate what TEXT GRAD looks like for a system made of two
LLM calls, and then give the more general form for arbitrarily complex systems.
Warmup: system with two LLM calls
Example computation graph. In traditional automatic differentiation, we compute gradients that pro-
vides a direction that would improve the variable with respect to a downstream loss with the chain-rule.
For a simple analog, let us look at the simple system:
Prediction = LLM(Prompt + Question), (1)
Evaluation = LLM(Evaluation Instruction + Prediction), (2)
2

[PAGE 3]
Automatic “Differentiation” via Text
d
c
e
f
Molecule at iteration 1
Vina Score: -4.3 kcal/mol
Molecule at iteration 2
Vina Score: -5.5 kcal/mol
Vina Score: -7.5 kcal/mol
Molecule at iteration 3
Add functional 
groups that increase 
polarity for stronger 
interactions.
       Gradients
Introduce polar or 
aromatic groups to 
increase interaction 
points.
       Gradients
TextGrad for molecule optimization
0.3
0.5
-0.1
1.2
0.7
-0.4
0.5
 0.7
Input layer Hidden layer
Output Loss
0.1
0.5
-0.2
-0.1
0.3
0.2
-0.1
-0.05
a bNeural network and backpropagation
using numerical gradients
Prompt
Inputs  Intermediate Outputs
Query
Tool Prompt
LLM
Search Engine
Tool Caller
LLM LLM
Loss
Evaluation Instruction
Blackbox AI systems and backpropagation
using natural language ‘gradients’
Input Tensor(image) tg.Variable(article)
Model ResNet50() tg.BlackboxLLM("You are a summarizer.")
Loss CrossEntropyLoss() tg.TextLoss("Rate the summary.")
Optimizer SGD(list(model.parameters())) tg.TGD(list(model.parameters()))
PyTorchMath
Forward pass
loss = loss_fn(model(input))
Backward pass
loss.backward()
Automatic differentiation
Updating variable
optimizer.step()
Analogy in abstractions1
2
TextGrad for code optimization
 = 0.124
 = 0.267
 “this prompt can 
   be improved by...”=
 “this response can 
   be improved by...”=
Output
Output
Output
PyTorch and TextGrad share the same 
syntax for backpropagation and optimization.
Code at iteration t+1
for i in range(n):
    if nums[i] < k:
        balance -= 1
    elif nums[i] > k:
        balance += 1
    else:
        found_k = True
    if nums[i] == k:
        result += count.get(balance, 0) + 
            count.get(balance - 1, 0)
    else:
        count[balance] = count.get(balance, 0) + 1
Code at iteration t
for i in range(n):
    if nums[i] < k:
        balance -= 1
    elif nums[i] > k:
        balance += 1
    if nums[i] == k:
        result += count.get(balance, 0) + 
            count.get(balance - 1, 0)
    else:
        result += count.get(balance, 0)
    count[balance] = count.get(balance, 0) + 1
**Handling `nums[i] == 
k`**: The current logic 
does not correctly 
handle the case when 
`nums[i] == k`. The 
balance should be reset 
or adjusted differently 
when `k` is 
encountered. ...
      Gradients
TextGrad
g TextGrad for prompt optimization
Prompt after optimization (Accuracy = 91.9%)
Prompt at initialization (Accuracy = 77.8%)
You will answer a reasoning question. Think step by step. The last line of your 
response should be of the following format: 'Answer: $VALUE' where VALUE is 
a numerical value.
You will answer a reasoning question. List each item and its quantity in a clear 
and consistent format, such as '- Item: Quantity'. Sum the values directly from 
the list and provide a concise summation. Ensure the final answer is clearly 
indicated in the format: 'Answer: $VALUE' where VALUE is a numerical value. 
Verify the relevance of each item to the context of the query and handle 
potential errors or ambiguities in the input. Double-check the final count to 
ensure accuracy."
TextGrad for treatment plan optimization
The current weight 
for the rectum and 
bladder are relatively 
low, which is not 
sufficient to protect 
the rectum and 
bladder...
       Gradients
Final Output
High dosage in 
bladder and 
rectum
Better protected 
bladder and 
rectum
Dose:
Low High
Figure 1: Automatic “Differentiation” via Text (a, b).Backpropagation of gradients is the driving force of
deep learning. We do not have gradients for compound systems of blackbox AI systems, but we can con-
struct analogous backpropagation for text-based feedback, forming the basis of TEXT GRAD . Abstractions
in TEXT GRAD (c). We share the same abstractions and syntax as PyTorch to our framework generalizable
and easy-to-learn. Applications of TEXT GRAD (d,e,f,g). In Section 3.4, we optimize molecular structures
for properties such as druglikeness and protein binding affinity (d). In Section 3.1, we optimize solutions to
coding problems (e). In Section 3.5, we optimize radiotherapy treatment plans to improve patient outcomes
(f). In Section 3.3, we optimize prompts to improve the reasoning of language models (g).
3

[PAGE 4]
Automatic “Differentiation” via Text
where we denote the free parameter to optimize, the prompt, with green, and we use + to denote concate-
nation of two strings, and use LLM (x) to give x as a prompt to a language model to collect the response.
We will use the chain notation:
Prompt + Question LLM− − →Evaluation Instruction + Prediction LLM− − →Evaluation, (3)
as another way to denote this system, where we make one LLM call to generate a Prediction for a Question
using a Prompt, and another LLM call to evaluate this Prediction.
Example gradient computation. In this example system, to improve the Prompt with respect to the eval-
uation, we instantiate an analog of the backpropagation [19] algorithm through the following:
Gradient computation for the simple graph: Prompt LLM− − →Prediction LLM− − →Evaluation
∂Evaluation
∂Prediction = ∇LLM(Prediction, Evaluation), (4)
∂Evaluation
∂Prompt = ∂Evaluation
∂Prediction ◦ ∂Prediction
∂Prompt = ∇LLM(Prompt, Prediction, ∂Evaluation
∂Prediction ), (5)
where we use ∇LLM for the gradient operator when the forward function is an LLM call. a In par-
ticular, this function returns natural language feedback such as ‘This prediction can be improved by. . .’
where the feedback describes how to modify the variable to improve the downstream objective,
analogous to gradients in optimization. We first collect feedback to the Prediction variable using the
evaluation. Then, given this feedback and the (Prompt LLM− − →Prediction) call, we collect the feedback
on the Prompt.
aNote that we overload the notation to denote both for cases when the output variable does not have successors (e.g.,
∇LLM(Prediction, Evaluation)) and when it has successors, and thus gradients (e.g., ∇LLM(Prompt, Prediction, ∂Loss
∂Prediction )).
Below is a flexible way to instantiate ∇LLM to collect feedback for a simple system like x LLM− − →y LLM− − → L:
Example implementation for the gradient operator
∂L
∂x = ∇LLM(x, y, ∂L
∂y ) ≜ ”Here is a conversation with an LLM: {x|y}.” (6)
+
LLM(Here is a conversation with an LLM: {x|y}.
Below are the criticisms on {y}:
∂L
∂y

Explain how to improve {x}.),
where the gradient object is a combination of the context in which the variable appears and the
feedback obtained from an LLMa, defined analogously to Pryzant et al. [25]. Note that this operator
does not depend on, e.g., the application domain. Once implemented, the gradient operator for LLM
calls are fixed throughout the framework for all applications.
aThe exact prompts we use are different to ensure generality and flexibility; we use these examples only for exposition.
4

[PAGE 5]
Automatic “Differentiation” via Text
Example optimizer. In standard gradient descent, the current value of the variable is combined with the
gradients through subtraction, e.g.:
θnew = GradientDescent.step(θ, ∂L
∂θ ) =θ − ∂L
∂θ . (7)
Continuing the gradient-based optimization analogy, we use Textual Gradient Descent (TGD):
Updating the Prompt variable in the simple graph via TGD.
Promptnew = TGD.step(Prompt, ∂Evaluation
∂Prompt ). (8)
to update the parameters, in this case, the Prompt. In particular, given the current variable and the
gradients (feedback) we collected for this variable, the optimizer seeks to update this variable.
A concrete way to instantiate TGD is the following:
Example implementation of one TGD iteration
xnew = TGD.step(x, ∂L
∂x ) ≜ LLM(Below are the criticisms on {x}: (9)
∂L
∂x

Incorporate the criticisms, and produce a new variable.).
where x is the variable we would like to improve, and∂L
∂x is the feedback we obtained for the variable
during the backward passa. Similar to the gradient operator, this function also does not depend on
the domain of application, and TGD implementation is the same across all uses of the framework.
aThe exact prompts we use are different to ensure generality and flexibility; we use these examples only for exposition.
The general case
The abstraction readily applies to arbitrarily complex systems. Define a computation graph by
v = fv(PredecessorsOf(v)) ∀v ∈ V (10)
where v is a variable in the graph, V is the set of all variables in the graph, and SuccessorsOf returns the
successors and PredecessorsOf returns the predecessors of a variable. Generally speaking, the value of v
can be unstructured data, such as natural language text or images. For most of the results and exposition
in this paper, v is natural language text.
Further, let us have fv as the transformation that consumes a set of variables and produces the variable
v. For instance, we can use an LLM or Numerical Simulator as a transformation. Since different functions
will have different ways to compute gradients and collect feedback for, we will generally use ∇f to denote
the gradient function for a function f . For the sake of exposition, we will omit the subscript when the
function is obvious.
The gradients are computed by
∂L
∂v =
[
w∈SuccessorsOf(v)
∇f

v, w, ∂L
∂w

, (11)
5

[PAGE 6]
Automatic “Differentiation” via Text
where we collect the set of gradients from all successors ofv. Intuitively, we get feedback from every context
in which a variable v was used, and aggregate them.
Equation 11 recursively computes the gradients of the downstream objective with respect to the desired
variables v in the graph. The ∇f function takes as input the gradients of L with respect to the successors of
a given variable v, the value of the variable v and the successors themselves. Note that the final gradient
variable comprises a set of contexts and criticisms for any place a variable was used in.
Finally, to update any desired variable v in the graph, we can use an optimizer:
vnew = TGD.step

v, ∂L
∂v

, (12)
which updates the value of v based on its current value and the gradients. For a computation graph where
there are n edges, each iteration of optimization performs at most n additional language model calls to
compute gradients (1 call using the gradient operator for each edge in the computation graph). For imple-
mentations of operations in TEXT GRAD , see Appendix A.
Objective functions
In numerical optimization and automatic differentiation, the objective function is typically a differentiable
function, such as mean squared error or cross entropy. In TEXT GRAD , the objective can be a complex
and potentially nondifferentiable function, where the domain and codomain of the function can be un-
structured data. This choice adds important generality and flexibility to the framework. For instance, we
demonstrate that the objective can be specified in natural language text and computed by prompting a
language model (§3.3), an output of a code interpreter running unit tests (§3.1), or outputs of molecular
simulation engines (§3.4). For instance, a simple loss function for a code snippet can be the following:
Loss(code, target goal) =LLM(Here is a code snippet:{code}. (13)
Here is the goal for this snippet:{target goal}.
Evaluate the snippet for correctness and runtime complexity.),
where we can use this evaluation signal to optimize the code snippet, powered by the well-documented
ability of LLMs to simulate human feedback, self-evaluate, and self-improve [10, 28–33].
Instance vs Prompt Optimization
There are two classes of optimization problems we explore.
In instance optimization,we directly treat a solution to a problem—e.g., a code snippet, the solution
to a problem or a molecule—as an optimization variable. For instance, in Equation 13, we have a code
instance that we would like to improve at test time. Our framework produces the gradients for and directly
optimizes the code variable.
In prompt optimization,the goal is to find a prompt that improves the performance of an LLM across
multiple queries for a task. For example, we may want to find a system prompt to an LLM that improve the
performance on mathematical reasoning questions (see Section 3.3 for examples). In particular, we want
the system prompt to generalize, in contrast to instance optimization where the only goal is to improve the
solution for a given query at test time.
Crucially, both types of problems can be solved without hand-crafting the framework.
Optimization Techniques
Automatic differentiation is a strong analogy for TEXT GRAD and provides conceptual support for opti-
mization techniques implemented in the framework. Below, we describe some examples.
Batch Optimization:We implement stochastic minibatch gradient descent [18, 34] for prompt optimiza-
tion. Specifically, after doing a forward pass with multiple instances in a batch and evaluate individual loss
6

[PAGE 7]
Automatic “Differentiation” via Text
terms, we use the tg.sum function to sum the losses (akin to torch.sum). In the backward pass, gradients
on variables through individual loss terms are concatenated, mirroring backpropagating through addition.
Constrained Optimization:We use natural language constraints, building on constrained optimization
as an analogy [35]. In particular, we use natural language constraints (e.g., such as ‘The last line of your
response should be of the following format: ’Answer: $LETTER’ where LETTER is one of ABCD.” ) to guide the
behavior of the optimizer. We observe that thanks to instruction-tuning [36, 37], language models can
follow these simple constraints, although their reliability can reduce with too many constraints [38, 39].
Momentum: We use the analogy to momentum in gradient descent [40, 41]. When optimizing a vari-
able, the TGD optimizer can optionally see the earlier iterations of the variable when making the update.
For more details on optimization techniques that are implemented in TEXT GRAD , see Appendix B.
3 Results
We demonstrate the flexibility of TEXT GRAD in a diverse array of applications. In § 3.1, we optimize code
snippets to solve hard coding problems from LeetCode. In § 3.2, we optimize solutions to science questions.
In § 3.3 we optimize prompts to improve the reasoning of LLMs. In § 3.4, we optimize chemical structures
for improved molecular properties. In § 3.5, we optimize treatment plans for prostate cancer patients.
3.1 Code optimization
Code optimization is a hallmark use case of instance optimization. Here, the goal is to optimize some code
to improve e.g., correctness or runtime complexity. We often have a computation graph like the following:
Code-Refinement Objective = LLM(Problem + Code + Test-time Instruction + Local Test Results) (14)
where we optimize theCode to solve a given Problem with limited, local test supervision and self-evaluation
through a test-instruction asking to critique the current iteration of the code. Figure 1e shows an example
for the problem You are given an array nums of size n consisting of distinct integers from 1 to n and a positive
integer k. Return the number of non-empty subarrays in nums that have a median equal to k. The first solution
proposed by gpt-4o does not pass the tests. TEXT GRAD identifies an edge case in the first solution and
provides a suggestion on how to improve it. The optimized implementation passes all tests.
Task: We use the LeetCode Hard dataset [26] to benchmark code optimization. LeetCode is an online
platform that offers coding practice questions in preparation for technical interviews. The LeetCode Hard
dataset contains examples of hard coding problems that are meant to be challenging for both humans and
language models, where the success metric is Completion Rate, i.e., passing all test cases for a given prob-
lem (GPT-4 reportedly achieved a 7% completion rate [26]). LeetCode test cases are not public, and thus,
after generation, the code has to be submitted to the LeetCode platform for evaluation on the unseen test
cases. This makes the platform more suitable to evaluate the performance of language models.
Baseline: Reflexion [26] is the state-of-the-art method on the LeetCode Hard dataset. Their approach
prompts an LLM to self-reflect on code snippets and the errors that were generated at test time using can-
didate unit tests. Given the self-reflection, the LLM is prompted again to provide an updated piece of code,
conditioned on the self-reflection and the errors. We ran Reflexion on LeetCodeHard using gpt-4o us-
ing 1 in-context demonstration to guide the behavior (one-shot). In addition to Reflexion, we also run a
zero-shot baseline using gpt-4o mimicking the same zero-shot baseline described in [26]. In comparison,
TEXT GRAD runs in a zero-shot setting, without any demonstrations.
Results: Existing results [26] showed a 7% pass rate for GPT-4 zero-shot and 15% for GPT-4 with Re-
flexion. We show that these results have now been boosted to 23% for gpt-4o zero-shot and 31% when
Reflexion is used. With TEXT GRAD , we can optimize solutions to achieve a performance of 36%. These
improvements are more impressive considering that Reflexion was ran with in-context demonstrations and
TEXT GRAD did not use any demonstrations (i.e. zero-shot).
7

[PAGE 8]
Automatic “Differentiation” via Text
Code Refinement Objective
LLM("You are an intelligent assistant used as an evaluator, and part of an optimization system. You
will analyze a code implementation for a coding problem and unit test results. The code will be
tested with harder tests, so do not just check if the code passes the provided tests. Think about the
correctness of the code and its performance in harder test cases. Give very concise feedback. In-
vestigate the code problem and the provided implementation. For each failed unit test case, start
analyzing it by saying "The code did not pass this test because...". Explain why the current imple-
mentation is not getting the expected output. Do not provide a revised implementation. Carefully
suggest why there are issues with the code and provide feedback.
{Test-time Instruction}
**The coding problem:**
{Problem}
**Code generated that must be evaluated for correctness and runtime performance**
{Code}
**The test results:**
{Local test Results}
Table 1:Code optimization for LeetCode Hard using gpt-4o. Results are averaged over 5 seeds.
Task Method Completion Rate
LeetCode Hard [26]
Zero-shot [26] 0.26
Reflexion (1 demonstration, 5 iterations) [26] 0.31 ± 0.012
TEXT GRAD (0 demonstrations, 5 iterations) 0.36 ± 0.018
3.2 Solution optimization by test-time training to improve problem solving
Here, we focus on the task of solution optimization via TEXT GRAD . In solution optimization, the goal is
to improve the solution to a complex problem, such as a question about quantum mechanics or organic
chemistry. In particular, we often have a computation graph like the following:
Solution Refinement Objective = LLM(Question + Solution + Test-time Instruction) (15)
where the parameter we optimize is the Solution, and the loss function is obtained by an evaluation of
the solution, e.g., with an LLM. At each iteration, the LLM is prompted with the question, current solution,
and some test-time instruction asking to critique or investigate the current iteration. Over the optimization
trajectory, the solution is refined using this test-time self-evaluation. More generally, this idea is known as
test-time training [42, 43], where a machine learning model is trained on a test instance at test-time, often
with a self-supervised objective. Similarly, recent work have shown the merits of self-refinement also for
reasoning tasks [26, 30, 44]. In particular, even though an LLM may not get the answer to a question or the
solution to a problem right at first attempt, it can improve the response through iterative refinement.
For instance, the objective function for the refinement looks like the following:
Solution Refinement Objective
LLM("Below is a multi-choice question and a prediction. You are a critical and creative scientist.
Your job is to investigate the prediction. Critically go through reasoning steps, and see if there is a
reason why the prediction could be incorrect.
Use the Janusian Process, think about whether alternative answers could be true.
Question: {Question}
Answer by the language model: {Solution}")
8

[PAGE 9]
Automatic “Differentiation” via Text
Below is a representative implementation of solution optimization in TEXT GRAD .
1 # Assume we have the test_dataset
2 question , answer = test_dataset [i]
3 # Initialize the test time loss function
4 # This has the system prompt provided above as ‘ Solution Refinement Objective ’
5 test_time_loss_fn = MultipleChoiceTestTime ()
6 # Get a zero - shot solution from an LLM
7 solution : Variable = zero_shot_llm ( question )
8 # Optimize the solution itself
9 optimizer = tg. TextualGradientDescent ( parameters =[ solution ])
10
11 for iteration in range ( max_iterations ):
12 optimizer . zero_grad ()
13 # Note how the loss is self - supervised ( does not depend on any ground truth .)
14 loss = test_time_loss_fn ( question , solution )
15 # Populate the gradients , and update the solution
16 loss . backward ()
17 optimizer . step ()
Code Snippet 1:A representative implementation of solution optimization in TEXT GRAD .
Task: Google-proof Question Answering (GPQA) [27] is a recent benchmark where challenging multiple-
choice questions in physics, biology, and chemistry are created and labeled by domain experts who have
or are pursuing PhD degrees. In this benchmark, experts and skilled non-experts are reported to achieve
81% and 22% accuracy respectively, demonstrating the difficulty of the questions. Importantly, this is a
benchmark where performance has not yet saturated, where to our knowledge, the best reported results,
achieved by gpt-4o, gets 53.6% accuracy in the diamond subset. We also use two challenging subsets (Ma-
chine Learning and College Physics) of the MMLU [45] question answering benchmark that is used to track
the progress of language modeling and whether LLMs reached human-level performance. Here the expert
human accuracy on average is around 90%. For the details of the question format and prompts, please see
Appendix D.
Method: We report two baselines. First, the reported results in the gpt-4o release document states
53.6% accuracy. However, their official implementation uses a temperature of 0.5 for generations, thus we
also test gpt-4o with temperature 0 and Chain-of-Thought (CoT) [46, 47] prompting provided in the official
implementation1. For TEXT GRAD , we perform 3 iterations of test-time updates (i.e. update the solution
three times) and perform majority voting across all solutions to get the final answer. We use string-based
metrics to compute the final accuracy of each answer.
Results: With TEXT GRAD , we improve the performance ofgpt-4o in the challenging question-answering
tasks and report the results in Table 2. To our best knowledge, 55% is the best known result in the GPQA
dataset so far. Similarly, we improve the performance in MMLU subsets from 85.7% to 88.4% (Machine
Learning) and 91.2% to 95.1% (College Physics). These results show that by spending more computation
at test-time through TEXT GRAD self-refinement, we can improve the question answering performance of
even the most capable models.
3.3 Prompt optimization for reasoning
While LLMs demonstrate an impressive performance in reasoning tasks, their performance can be sen-
sitive to the prompt used to guide their behavior. In particular, with the right choice of a prompt, their
performance can be significantly improved [49]. In prompt optimization, the goal is to find a prompt or an
instruction to guide the behavior of an LLM, such that it performs well on a given task. In particular, we
often have a computation graph like the following:
Answer = LLM(Prompt, Question)
Evaluation Metric = Evaluator(Answer, Ground Truth) (16)
1We do this to minimize randomness, however, discussions claim there may be other sources of non-determinism withgpt-4.
9

[PAGE 10]
Automatic “Differentiation” via Text
Table 2:Solution optimization for zero-shot question answering with gpt-4o.
Dataset Method Accuracy ( %)
Google-proof QA [27]
CoT [46, 47] 51.0
Best reported [48] 53.6
TEXT GRAD 55.0
MMLU-Machine Learning [45] CoT [46, 47] 85.7
TEXT GRAD 88.4
MMLU-College Physics [45] CoT [46, 47] 91.2
TEXT GRAD 95.1
where we have a Question for the task, an Answer to the question, and an Evaluation Metric indicating
the quality of the output given the ground truth answer. For instance, for a question-answering task, the
evaluation metric would be the accuracy of the answer, evaluated e.g. using string-based metrics.
Here, given a handful of training examples to optimize a Prompt, the goal is to maximize the perfor-
mance of an LLM on the given task. In our experiments, our goal is to improve the performance of a
weaker and cheaper model (e.g., gpt-3.5-turbo-0125) using the feedback generated by stronger models
(e.g., gpt-4o). This is useful in practice because by paying a fixed cost to optimize a Prompt, the prompt-
optimized weaker model can be used with cheaper inference costs instead of using the strong and more
expensive model.
1 # Initialize the system prompt
2 system_prompt = tg. Variable (" You are a helpful language model . Think step by step .",
3 requires_grad =True ,
4 role_description =" system prompt to the language model ")
5
6 # Set up the model object ’ parameterized by ’ the prompt .
7 model = tg. BlackboxLLM ( system_prompt = system_prompt )
8
9 # Optimize the system prompt
10 optimizer = tg. TextualGradientDescent ( parameters =[ system_prompt ])
11
12 for iteration in range ( max_iterations ):
13 batch_x , batch_y = next ( train_loader )
14 optimizer . zero_grad ()
15 # Do the forward pass
16 responses = model ( batch_x )
17 losses = [ loss_fn ( response , y) for ( response , y) in zip ( responses , batch_y )]
18 total_loss = tg. sum ( losses )
19 # Perform the backward pass and compute gradients
20 total_loss . backward ()
21 # Update the system prompt
22 optimizer . step ()
Code Snippet 2:A simple implementation of prompt optimization with TEXT GRAD .
Here, we use TEXT GRAD in a minibatch stochastic gradient descent setting [18, 34]. In particular, at each
iteration, we use a few training examples to run the forward pass in Equation 16. A pseudocode and short
implementation can be found in the snippet above. Full details of prompt optimization can be found in
Appendix E. Unlike instance optimization, where TEXT GRAD tries to optimize each individual solution,
the goal here is to optimize a single prompt that works well across all the questions in a benchmark.
Tasks: We explore prompt optimization in multiple datasets, including the two standard reasoning
tasks (Object Counting and Word Sorting) from Big Bench Hard (randomly split into 50/100/100 train/val-
idation/test samples) [50, 51], GSM8k grade-school math problem solving [52] (using train/validation/test
splits from DSPy). For GSM8k and Object Counting, we use a string-based exact match metric to quantify
accuracy (i.e. whether the final number provided in the response is the same as the ground truth answer).
10

[PAGE 11]
Automatic “Differentiation” via Text
For Word Sorting, we use an LLM to compare the response and the ground truth answer. We give more
details about the tasks, prompts, and example queries in Appendix E.1.
Methods: We explore improving the performance ofgpt-3.5-turbo-0125 using gpt-4o [48] to provide
feedback during backpropagation. In particular, while the forward model that performs the reasoning is
gpt-3.5-turbo-0125, we use gpt-4o to provide the feedback and improve the prompt. We use a batch
size of 3 with 12 iterations, i.e., the model sees 36 training examples in total, sampled randomly with re-
placement. After each iteration, we run a validation loop with the validation set of the datasets, and if the
performance is better than the previous iteration we update the Prompt.
Baselines: We have two main baselines:
1. Zero-shot Chain-of-Thought (CoT) [46, 47]:We initialize all prompts as zero-shot CoT prompt, where a
model is instructed to ‘Think step-by-step’ to explain its reasoning before giving its answer. This strategy
is well-known to be a strong baseline for prompting.
2. DSPy is a state-of-the-art language model programming and prompt optimization framework [10], thus
we use it as the reference baseline. We instantiate DSPy’s BootstrappedFewShotRandomSearch (BFSR)
optimizer with 10 candidate programs and 8 few-shot examples. This optimizer identifies demonstra-
tions to include in the prompt as few-shot examples. This is done through generating traces of LLM
inputs and outputs that individually pass the metric (in this case, accuracy) and includes CoT reason-
ing. It then applies random search over subsets of up to size eight shots with these demonstrations.
Table 3: Prompt optimization for reasoning tasks.With TEXT GRAD , we optimize a system prompt for
gpt-3.5-turbo using gpt-4o as the gradient engine that provides the feedback during backpropagation.
Dataset Method Accuracy ( %)
Object Counting [50, 51]
CoT (0-shot) [46, 47] 77.8
DSPy (BFSR, 8 demonstrations) [10] 84.9
TEXT GRAD (instruction-only, 0 demonstrations) 91.9
Word Sorting [50, 51]
CoT (0-shot) [46, 47] 76.7
DSPy (BFSR, 8 demonstrations) [10] 79.8
TEXT GRAD (instruction-only, 0 demonstrations) 79.8
GSM8k [52]
CoT (0-shot) [46, 47] 72.9
DSPy (BFSR, 8 demonstrations) [10] 81.1
TEXT GRAD (instruction-only, 0 demonstrations) 81.1
Example: TextGrad optimized prompt for gpt-3.5-turbo-0125
Prompt at initialization (GSM8k Accuracy= 72.9%):
You will answer a mathematical reasoning question. Think step by step. Always conclude the last line of your
response should be of the following format: ’Answer: $V ALUE’ where V ALUE is a numerical value."
Prompt after 12 iterations with batch size 3 (GSM8k Accuracy= 81.1%):
You will answer a mathematical reasoning question. Restate the problem in your own words to ensure un-
derstanding. Break down the problem into smaller steps, explaining each calculation in detail. Verify each
step and re-check your calculations for accuracy. Use proper mathematical notation and maintain consistency
with the context of the question. Always conclude with the final answer in the following format: ’Answer:
$V ALUE’ where V ALUE is a numerical value.
Results: Across all three tasks, TEXT GRAD improves the performance of the 0-shot prompt signifi-
cantly. It performs similarly to DSPy [10] for Word Sorting and GSM8k, and improves over DSPy by 7%
for Object Counting. While the 8 demonstrations in the context can help guide the behavior of the LLM, it
can increase the cost of inference. Interestingly, the DSPy optimizer and TEXT GRAD make complementary
adjustments—the former adds in-context demonstration examples and latter optimizes the system prompt.
Adding the examples selected by DSPy to TEXT GRAD ’s optimized prompt could further improve perfor-
11

[PAGE 12]
Automatic “Differentiation” via Text
mance (for GSM8k, directly combining the demonstrations from DSPy with the instruction from TextGrad
increases the accuracy to 82.1%), suggesting that a fruitful direction is to combine both approaches.
3.4 Molecule optimization
TEXT GRAD supports a variety of optimization problems, including multi-objective optimization tasks com-
monly found in science and engineering applications. For example, in drug discovery, researchers seek to
discover or design molecules that maximize a variety of objectives with regards to synthesizability, efficacy,
and safety [53, 54]. To demonstrate TEXT GRAD ’s applications to multi-objective optimization, we apply
TEXT GRAD to drug molecule optimization, and show how our framework can interface with computa-
tional tools and optimize chemical structures towards simultaneously improving their binding affinity and
druglikeness.
Task: A critical consideration for potential drug molecules is their binding affinity, which represents the
strength of the interactions between the molecule and its protein target. Drug designers seek molecules with
high binding affinities to relevant drug targets, as they require lower and less frequent doses to achieve ef-
ficacy. This affinity can be quantified by free energy ∆G, which describes the ratio of probabilities between
bound and unbound ligand-receptor pairs. ∆G can be estimated using “docking” simulations of protein-
ligand binding [55, 56]. In our experiments, we employ the Vina score from the Autodock Vina tool, a
widely used physics-based docking simulator [57]. The more negative the Vina score, the greater probabil-
ity that the drug will bind to its intended target.
Potential drug molecules are also evaluated by theirdruglikeness, which estimates how the molecule will
behave in vivo, with respect to solubility, permeability, metabolic stability and transporter effects. Molecules
with high druglikeness are more likely to be absorbed by the body and reach their targets [58]. One popular
metric for “druglikeness” is the Quantatiative Estimate of Druglikeness (QED) score, a weighted composite
metric of important chemical characteristics such as molecular weight, lipophilicity, polar surface area,
among others. The QED score ranges from 0 to 1, where 1 indicates high druglikeness [59].
Though there are many more considerations for successful molecules, in our experiments, we restrict
our objectives to minimizing the Vina score and maximizing the QED, due to the relative maturity of these
two metrics. The competing tradeoffs between these two metrics makes the optimization task realistic and
challenging. In particular, docking scores tend to prefer larger molecules with many functional groups
that maximize interactions with a binding site [55, 56, 60]. In contrast, the druglikeness encourages lighter,
simpler molecules that have better absorption properties [58, 59]. Thus, simultaneously optimizing both
objectives is non-trivial.
Methods: We apply TEXT GRAD to drug molecule optimization by encoding molecules as SMILES
strings and constructing a multi-objective loss from the Vina and QED scores. Namely, we perform in-
stance optimization over SMILES strings, where the gradients generated by TEXT GRAD with respect to
the multi-objective loss are used to update the text representing the molecule.
Evaluation = LLM((Affinity(SMILESi, target), Druglikeness(SMILESi)) (17)
SMILESi+1 = TGD.step

SMILESi, ∂Evaluation
∂SMILESi

(18)
We use gpt-4o as our LLM with the prompt text found in Appendix F.2. At each iteration, the current
molecule is evaluated by estimating its binding affinity to the target protein using the Vina score from
Autodock Vina and using the QED score for druglikeness from RDKit (Appendix F.1). Each molecule is
initialized as a small chemical fragment from a functional group. We apply TEXT GRAD to all 58 targets
in the DOCKSTRING molecule evaluation benchmark [61]. These 58 targets consist of clinically relevant
proteins sampled from a variety of structural classes, 29 of which have clinically approved drugs. For each
target, we optimize a starting fragment using TEXT GRAD for 10 iterations, for 3 unique initial fragments.
To evaluate our performance, we compare the characteristics of the molecules generated byTEXT GRAD to
clinically approved drugs for the respective protein (Appendix F.3).
Results: For all 58 targets,TEXT GRAD consistently generates molecules with improved binding affinity
and druglikeness irrespective of the initial starting fragment (Appendix F.4). For the 29 protein targets with
12

[PAGE 13]
Automatic “Differentiation” via Text
       Gradients: Introduce functional 
groups that can form hydrogen 
bonds or hydrophobic interactions.
       Gradients: Add hydrophobic groups or aromatic 
rings to enhance interactions ... while maintaining a 
balance of hydrophobic and hydrophilic properties.
Vina: -4.2 kcal/mol
QED: 0.44
Vina: -5.5 kcal/mol
QED: 0.59
Vina: -7.5 kcal/mol
QED: 0.79
PPARA
(2p54)
Fenofibric Acid (Fibricor)
Tanimoto: 0.38
Tversky: 0.36
TextGrad
0.4 0.5 0.6 0.7 0.8 0.9 1.0
druglikeness (QED)
-8
-7
-6
-5
-4binding affinity (vina score)Fenofibrate
Gemfibrozil
Fenofibric acid
0.0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1.0
druglikeness (QED)
-11
-10
-9
-8
-7
-6
-5
-4
-3
-2
binding affinity (vina score)
Initialization
DrugBank
TextGrad
b c
a
d e
Molecule optimization
Figure 2: Molecule optimization via Text. TEXT GRAD optimizes a starting benzene fragment to improve
its druglikeness (higher QED) and binding affinity (lower vina score) to the protein receptor PPARA. The
textual gradients for the first three iterations are shown in ( a), and the performance of all ten iterations
compared to clinically approved molecules targetting PPARA in (c). The molecule at the final iteration has
low structural similarity with its most similar clinically approved counterpart, and better QED and Vina
scores (d) with a highly plausible pose geometry shown in(e). Across 29 targets and three initial fragments,
TextGrad successfully designs molecules with similar vina scores and greater QED scores than clinically
approved molecules (b).
13

[PAGE 14]
Automatic “Differentiation” via Text
clinically approved drugs, we observe thatTEXT GRAD generates molecules with highly competitive affin-
ity and druglikeness when compared to clinical molecules evaluated using the same loss function (Figure
2 (b)). The resulting molecules exhibit unique structures compared to their clinical approved counterparts
and existing compounds (Appendix F.5), while maintaining similar in silico safety profiles (Appendix F.6).
While there exist alternative machine learning methods for de novo molecular generation, TEXT GRAD of-
fers two key advantages over its counterparts: Firstly, by combining traditonal chemoinformatics tools with
the the general knowledge and reasoning capabilities of LLMs, TEXT GRAD produces competitive results
even without a prior training set. Secondly, TEXT GRAD ’s framework of natural language gradients produce
explainable decisions, enabling researchers to understand precisely how and why a molecule’s structure
was constructed. Together, these two characteristics invoke a promising future for the role of AI agents in
scientific discovery.
3.5 Radiotherapy treatment plan optimization
Radiation therapy, also known as radiotherapy, is a cancer treatment that uses beams of intense energy, such
as X-rays, to kill cancer cells. Before treatment begins, a radiotherapy team, including radiation oncologists
and planners, collaborates to design an effective treatment plan. This involves determining the necessary
dose of radiotherapy and pinpointing the exact locations that need treatment.
Radiotherapy treatment planning can be formulated as a two-loop optimization problem. The inner
loop, known as inverse planning, includes processes such as influence map optimization and direct aper-
ture optimization [62]. This optimization problem is typically a constrained one, solved by a numerical op-
timizer, aiming to minimize a weighted cost function balancing multiple conflicting objectives [63]. These
objectives include delivering the prescribed dose to the planning target volume (PTV), which encompasses
the tumor and an additional margin to account for uncertainties in planning or treatment delivery, while
protecting critical normal tissues, known as organs at risk (OARs), from receiving unsafe doses.
The main challenge in treatment planning is translating overall clinical goals into weighted objective
functions and dose constraints that yield an acceptable plan [62]. Human planners often use a trial-and-
error approach, iteratively adjusting optimization hyperparameters based on the results of the optimiza-
tion process until the plans meet clinical requirements [62]. These hyperparameters include the weights
assigned to PTVs, organs, and other tissues in the objective function. This process can be subjective, in-
fluenced by the planner’s experience and the available time, and involves repeatedly using computation-
ally expensive optimization algorithms over many iterations. This makes the process inefficient, time-
consuming, and costly [64].
Method. We apply TEXT GRAD to perform the outer loop optimization, i.e. hyperparameter optimization
for the inner loop numerical optimizer. Instance optimization is performed with gpt-4o over the hyperpa-
rameters represented as a string: θ = “weight for PTV: [PTV WEIGHT], weight for bladder: [BLADDER
WEIGHT], weight for rectum: [RECTUM WEIGHT], weight for femoral heads: [FH WEIGHT], weight for
body: [BODY WEIGHT]”. When hyperparameters are provided, we obtain the treatment plan by adopting
a numerical optimizer and constructing a loss as the mismatch between the current plan and the clinical ob-
jectives. Specifically, to compute the gradient, we first solve the inner optimization loop using a numerical
optimizer matRad[65] to obtain the corresponding treatment plan P(θ) =matRad(θ). The loss is computed
on the treatment plan P and the clinical goals g using an LLM with prompts provided in Section G.1.
L = LLM(P(θ), g)
and the new hyperparameters are obtained by a TextGrad descent step
θnew = TGD.step

θ, ∂L
∂θ

.
To further improve LLM’s capability to understand the relationship between hyperparameters θ and the
resulting plan P from matRad, a set of paired plans and their corresponding hyperparameters {(Pi, θi)}N
i=1
is provided as context for LLMs during the TGD.step. Therefore,
θnew = TGD.step

θ, ∂L
∂θ
{(Pi, θi)}N
i=1

.
14

[PAGE 15]
Automatic “Differentiation” via Text
       Gradients: The current plan does not meet 
the criteria for the PTV.  The constraints on 
OARs are currently being met Recommendation: 
Increase the importance weight for the PTV.
       Gradients: The current weight for the rectum and bladder 
are relatively low, which is not sufficiently protect the rectum and 
bladder from receiving higher doses. Recommendation: Slightly 
increase the importance weight for the bladder and rectum.
Initialization Iteration 1 Iteration 5
......
    Mean dose [Gy]
           70.20
       +1.97 (0.36)
       +0.51 (0.09)
Target
PTV
     D95 [Gy]
       70.20
   -0.10 (0.15)
  +0.00 (0.00)
Method
Clinical Goal
Radiation Oncologist
TextGrad
 Mean dose [Gy]  
      22.39 (5.55)
      20.92 (0.79)
      23.88 (6.45)
      17.18 (4.20)
Organ Method
Radiation Oncologist
Radiation Oncologist
TextGrad
TextGrad
Bladder
Rectum
b c
a
d e
rectum
bladder
Init. 1 2 3 4 5
Iterations
50
55
60
65
70
75
80
85
90Dose (Gy)
PTV (                        )
Clinical Goal
TextGrad
Init. 1 2 3 4 5
Iterations
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40Dose (Gy)
Bladder (                        )
Rectum (                        )
Clinically Allowed Maximum
TextGrad
TextGrad
  Dose: Low High
Figure 3: Radiotherapy treatment plan optimization.Visualization of backpropagated textual gradients
adjusting importance weights of planning target volumes (PTVs) and organs at risk (OARs) to balance
tumor targeting and protection of OARs. Images in (a) show plan evolution from initialization to iteration
5. TEXT GRAD iteratively improves the mean dose and reduces the dose variance to the PTV , achieving the
clinical goal over multiple iterations (b). TEXT GRAD keeps the exposure for the bladder and rectum below
clinically allowed maximums (c). TEXT GRAD optimized plans have better dose metrics (mean dose and
D95) for PTV than clinically optimized plans (d), and lower doses on bladder and rectum, indicating better
protection of OARs (e).
15

[PAGE 16]
Automatic “Differentiation” via Text
Evaluation metrics. To evaluate a treatment plan, we adopt several commonly used dose metrics as a
plan cannot be evaluated using a single metric. We consider the mean dose delivered to the target/organ
volume, as well as Dq, which denotes the minimum dose received by q% of the target/organ volume.
Results. The gradients generated by TEXT GRAD provide meaningful guidance to improve the hyperpa-
rameters. As illustrated in Figure 3, when there is dose spillage outside the Planning Target Volume (PTV),
the gradient suggests an increase in the importance weight for the PTV . This adjustment results in a more
uniform and confined dose for the PTV . However, this can lead to insufficient protection of the bladder
and rectum as their relative weights are reduced. Therefore, in the following step, the gradients suggest
slightly increasing the weights for the bladder and rectum, resulting in better protection for these organs.
We compared TEXT GRAD optimized plans with the clinical plans used to treat five prostate cancer pa-
tients. In Figure 3 (c), we assess TextGrad’s capabilities in achieving clinical goals for the PTV region.
TextGrad outperforms the clinical plans across all metrics, achieving a higher mean dose, and a D95 that
exactly matches the prescribed dose. In Figure 3 (d), we focus on the sparing of healthy organs. TextGrad-
optimized plans achieve lower mean doses for these healthy organs, suggesting better organ sparing than
the human-optimized plans. We report the averages across five plans and with standard deviation included
in the bracket.
4 Related work
One related thread of work investigated the problem of prompt optimization. Practitioners demonstrated
that prompt engineering strategies such as intelligently picking few-shot examples and in-context learning,
CoT, ensembles can significantly boost performance of LLMs [66]. To automate this process, white-box
methods that leverage numerical gradients were developed to optimize prompts [67–70], however, these
methods cannot be used with closed-source models as they require access to model parameters. Various
works investigated using LLMs as prompt optimizers [12, 25, 71].
Under prompt optimization, there are two works closest to our philosophy that have been our inspi-
rations. First, DSPy [10, 72, 73] pioneered the idea of viewing complex LLM-based systems as programs
with potentially many layers, and proposes ways to build and optimize them in a programmatic fashion.
The framework is extensive, with results improving LLM performance in various question answering, rea-
soning, and prompt optimization tasks. Our work takes a different perspective that backpropagation and
its extensions can be a general and powerful framework to optimize the new generation of AI systems,
and perform multiple tasks outside of prompt optimization. In particular, we treat not only instructions
or demonstrations as variables to optimize, but also the instances we care about themselves — such as
molecules, treatment plans, code snippets, and so on. Second, greatly inspiring to us, Prompt Optimization
with Textual Gradients (ProTeGi) [25] defines the Textual Gradients in the context of prompt optimization,
where gradients are natural language feedback from LLMs given to the mistakes made during the task.
While ProTeGi is built on the textual gradient analogy, we expand this analogy more broadly to automatic
differentiation, and going substantially beyond prompt optimization tasks. In particular, both DSPy and
ProTeGi focused on prompt optimization, while a significant advance of TEXT GRAD , as demonstrated
through our diverse applications, is in instance optimization.
More generally, there is an emerging line of work built on the high-level idea of using LLMs as critics or
optimizers [10, 12, 25, 26, 30, 71, 74–80]. While many of these earlier frameworks demonstrated the utility of
LLMs as optimizers, we propose a single and general framework that was tested successfully in a variety of
applications. Within this framework, we can reason about optimizing chains or stacks of LLMs [81–83]: we
propagate natural language feedback. Similarly, once viewed as a general-purpose optimization engine, we
can formulate many relevant problems instantiated as a few lines of code in our framework, such as test-
time training [42, 43] or self-refinement of solutions and self-improvement [26, 30, 44, 84–91]. Building on
the optimization analogy, we already transferred several analogies from the traditional optimization litera-
ture such as momentum [40] through using earlier iterations in the context, use of batch optimization [92],
constrained optimization [35] using natural language constraints, and so on. Our work opens up a large
space to design the new generation of optimization algorithms, all within the same framework.
16

[PAGE 17]
Automatic “Differentiation” via Text
5 Discussion
TextGrad is built on three key principles: i) It is a general and performant framework that is not hand-
crafted for a specific application domain, ii) It is easy-to-use, mirroring PyTorch abstractions thus allowing
knowledge transfer, iii) It is fully open-source. Through TEXT GRAD , we obtained state-of-the-art results in
code optimization and PhD-level question answering, optimized prompts, and provided proof-of-concept
results in scientific applications such as developing molecules and optimizing treatment plans.
While we took a first step, there are various limitations that motivate future work to realize the potential
of automatic differentiation frameworks powered by LLMs. First, while we demonstrated the potential of
backpropagating text feedback, there are many applications our framework can be extended to. We hope
TEXT GRAD can be used to accelerate iterative processes in scientific discovery and increase the produc-
tivity of engineering efforts. For instance, to allow for this, we hope to extend the operations in our com-
putation graphs to include more components used in practical LLM applications, such as for tool use [83]
or retrieval-augmented generation systems [93]. Second, the automatic differentiation analogy enables a
large design space for algorithms. We believe there are many fruitful connections to be drawn between
numerical optimization, automatic differentiation, and TEXT GRAD . In particular, increasing the stability
of the optimization using variance reduction techniques [94], adaptive gradients [95], or self-verification
using LLMs [96] are interesting connections. Meta learning approaches [97–99] to optimize the TextGrad
framework using methods such as TextGrad itself is also an intriguing direction of future work.
Finally, while we conducted proof-of-concept applications of TEXT GRAD to design new molecules and
treatment plans with in silico validations, the ultimate test requires experimental and clinical assessments,
which are outside of the scope of this paper.
As the paradigm of AI shifts from training individual models to optimizing compound systems involv-
ing multiple interacting LLM components and tools, we need a new generation of automated optimizers.
TEXT GRAD combines the reasoning power of LLMs with the decomposable efficiency of backpropation to
create a general framework to optimize AI systems.
Acknowledgements
We would like to thank Duygu Yilmaz, Begum Ergun, Fatih Dinc, Yu Sun, Omar Khattab, Ian Covert, Kyle
Swanson, Omer Faruk Akgun, Yusuf Efe, Kevin Y Wu, Eric Wu, Kailas Vodrahalli, Oscar Pastor Serrano,
Patrick John Chia, Jacopo Tagliabue, Nitya Thakkar, Elana Simon, Pan Lu, Sabri Eyuboglu, Irena Gao,
Lingjiao Chen, and members of the Zou Group for their support and comments on this work.
17

[PAGE 18]
Automatic “Differentiation” via Text
References
1. Brown, T., Mann, B., Ryder, N., Subbiah, M., Kaplan, J. D., Dhariwal, P ., Neelakantan, A., Shyam,
P ., Sastry, G., Askell, A.,et al. Language models are few-shot learners. Advances in neural information
processing systems 33, 1877–1901 (2020).
2. Achiam, J., Adler, S., Agarwal, S., Ahmad, L., Akkaya, I., Aleman, F. L., Almeida, D., Altenschmidt, J.,
Altman, S., Anadkat, S., et al. Gpt-4 technical report. arXiv preprint arXiv:2303.08774 (2023).
3. Reid, M., Savinov, N., Teplyashin, D., Lepikhin, D., Lillicrap, T., Alayrac, J.-b., Soricut, R., Lazaridou,
A., Firat, O., Schrittwieser, J., et al. Gemini 1.5: Unlocking multimodal understanding across millions
of tokens of context. arXiv preprint arXiv:2403.05530 (2024).
4. AI@Meta. Llama 3 Model Card. https://github.com/meta- llama/llama3/blob/main/MODEL_
CARD.md (2024).
5. Anthropic, A. The Claude 3 Model Family: Opus, Sonnet, Haiku. Claude-3 Model Card (2024).
6. Bommasani, R., Hudson, D. A., Adeli, E., Altman, R., Arora, S., von Arx, S., Bernstein, M. S., Bohg, J.,
Bosselut, A., Brunskill, E., et al. On the opportunities and risks of foundation models. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2108.07258 (2021).
7. Trinh, T. H., Wu, Y., Le, Q. V ., He, H. & Luong, T. Solving olympiad geometry without human demon-
strations. Nature 625, 476–482 (2024).
8. Li, Y., Choi, D., Chung, J., Kushman, N., Schrittwieser, J., Leblond, R., Eccles, T., Keeling, J., Gimeno, F.,
Dal Lago, A., et al. Competition-level code generation with alphacode. Science 378, 1092–1097 (2022).
9. Yang, J., Jimenez, C. E., Wettig, A., Lieret, K., Yao, S., Narasimhan, K. & Press, O. SWE-agent: Agent-
Computer Interfaces Enable Automated Software Engineering 2024.
10. Khattab, O., Singhvi, A., Maheshwari, P ., Zhang, Z., Santhanam, K., A, S. V ., Haq, S., Sharma, A., Joshi,
T. T., Moazam, H., Miller, H., Zaharia, M. & Potts, C.DSPy: Compiling Declarative Language Model Calls
into State-of-the-Art Pipelines in The Twelfth International Conference on Learning Representations (2024).
https://openreview.net/forum?id=sY5N0zY5Od.
11. Zaharia, M., Khattab, O., Chen, L., Davis, J. Q., Miller, H., Potts, C., Zou, J., Carbin, M., Frankle, J.,
Rao, N. & Ghodsi, A. The Shift from Models to Compound AI Systems https://bair.berkeley.edu/
blog/2024/02/18/compound-ai-systems/. 2024.
12. Zhou, Y., Muresanu, A. I., Han, Z., Paster, K., Pitis, S., Chan, H. & Ba, J. Large Language Models
are Human-Level Prompt Engineers in The Eleventh International Conference on Learning Representations
(2023). https://openreview.net/forum?id=92gvk82DE-.
13. Krizhevsky, A., Sutskever, I. & Hinton, G. E. Imagenet classification with deep convolutional neural
networks. Advances in neural information processing systems 25 (2012).
14. Jumper, J., Evans, R., Pritzel, A., Green, T., Figurnov, M., Ronneberger, O., Tunyasuvunakool, K.,
Bates, R., Žídek, A., Potapenko, A.,et al. Highly accurate protein structure prediction with AlphaFold.
Nature 596, 583–589 (2021).
15. Fawzi, A., Balog, M., Huang, A., Hubert, T., Romera-Paredes, B., Barekatain, M., Novikov, A., R Ruiz,
F. J., Schrittwieser, J., Swirszcz, G., et al. Discovering faster matrix multiplication algorithms with
reinforcement learning. Nature 610, 47–53 (2022).
16. Mankowitz, D. J., Michi, A., Zhernov, A., Gelmi, M., Selvi, M., Paduraru, C., Leurent, E., Iqbal, S.,
Lespiau, J.-B., Ahern, A., et al. Faster sorting algorithms discovered using deep reinforcement learn-
ing. Nature 618, 257–263 (2023).
17. Merchant, A., Batzner, S., Schoenholz, S. S., Aykol, M., Cheon, G. & Cubuk, E. D. Scaling deep learning
for materials discovery. Nature 624, 80–85 (2023).
18. Goodfellow, I., Bengio, Y. & Courville, A. Deep learning (MIT press, 2016).
19. Rumelhart, D. E., Hinton, G. E. & Williams, R. J. Learning representations by back-propagating errors.
Nature 323, 533–536 (1986).
18

[PAGE 19]
Automatic “Differentiation” via Text
20. Jia, Y., Shelhamer, E., Donahue, J., Karayev, S., Long, J., Girshick, R., Guadarrama, S. & Darrell, T.
Caffe: Convolutional Architecture for Fast Feature Embedding. arXiv preprint arXiv:1408.5093 (2014).
21. Bergstra, J., Breuleux, O., Bastien, F., Lamblin, P ., Pascanu, R., Desjardins, G., Turian, J., Warde-Farley,
D. & Bengio, Y. Theano: A CPU and GPU Math Expression Compiler in Proceedings of the Python for
Scientific Computing Conference (SciPy) (2010).
22. Abadi, M., Barham, P ., Chen, J., Chen, Z., Davis, A., Dean, J., Devin, M., Ghemawat, S., Irving, G.,
Isard, M., et al. TensorFlow: A System for Large-Scale Machine Learning in 12th USENIX Symposium on
Operating Systems Design and Implementation (OSDI 16) (2016), 265–283.
23. Paszke, A., Gross, S., Massa, F., Lerer, A., Bradbury, J., Chanan, G., Killeen, T., Lin, Z., Gimelshein, N.,
Antiga, L., et al. Pytorch: An imperative style, high-performance deep learning library. Advances in
neural information processing systems 32 (2019).
24. Collobert, R., Bengio, S. & Mariéthoz, J. Torch: a modular machine learning software library (2002).
25. Pryzant, R., Iter, D., Li, J., Lee, Y., Zhu, C. & Zeng, M. Automatic Prompt Optimization with “Gradient
Descent” and Beam Search in Proceedings of the 2023 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language
Processing (eds Bouamor, H., Pino, J. & Bali, K.) (Association for Computational Linguistics, Singa-
pore, Dec. 2023), 7957–7968. https://aclanthology.org/2023.emnlp-main.494.
26. Shinn, N., Cassano, F., Gopinath, A., Narasimhan, K. & Yao, S. Reflexion: language agents with ver-
bal reinforcement learning in Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems 36 (2023). https : / /
proceedings.neurips.cc/paper_files/paper/2023/file/1b44b878bb782e6954cd888628510e90-
Paper-Conference.pdf.
27. Rein, D., Hou, B. L., Stickland, A. C., Petty, J., Pang, R. Y., Dirani, J., Michael, J. & Bowman, S. R. Gpqa:
A graduate-level google-proof q&a benchmark. arXiv preprint arXiv:2311.12022 (2023).
28. Li, X., Zhang, T., Dubois, Y., Taori, R., Gulrajani, I., Guestrin, C., Liang, P . & Hashimoto, T. B.Alpacae-
val: An automatic evaluator of instruction-following models 2023.
29. Bai, Y., Jones, A., Ndousse, K., Askell, A., Chen, A., DasSarma, N., Drain, D., Fort, S., Ganguli, D.,
Henighan, T.,et al. Training a helpful and harmless assistant with reinforcement learning from human
feedback. arXiv preprint arXiv:2204.05862 (2022).
30. Madaan, A., Tandon, N., Gupta, P ., Hallinan, S., Gao, L., Wiegreffe, S., Alon, U., Dziri, N., Prabhu-
moye, S., Yang, Y., et al. Self-refine: Iterative refinement with self-feedback. Advances in Neural Infor-
mation Processing Systems 36 (2024).
31. Stiennon, N., Ouyang, L., Wu, J., Ziegler, D., Lowe, R., Voss, C., Radford, A., Amodei, D. & Christiano,
P . F. Learning to summarize with human feedback.Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems
33, 3008–3021 (2020).
32. Yuan, W., Pang, R. Y., Cho, K., Sukhbaatar, S., Xu, J. & Weston, J. Self-rewarding language models.
arXiv preprint arXiv:2401.10020 (2024).
33. Dubois, Y., Li, C. X., Taori, R., Zhang, T., Gulrajani, I., Ba, J., Guestrin, C., Liang, P . S. & Hashimoto,
T. B. Alpacafarm: A simulation framework for methods that learn from human feedback.Advances in
Neural Information Processing Systems 36 (2024).
34. Bottou, L. Large-scale machine learning with stochastic gradient descent. Proceedings of COMPSTAT’2010,
177–186 (2010).
35. Boyd, S., Boyd, S. P . & Vandenberghe, L. Convex optimization (Cambridge university press, 2004).
36. Ouyang, L., Wu, J., Jiang, X., Almeida, D., Wainwright, C., Mishkin, P ., Zhang, C., Agarwal, S., Slama,
K., Ray, A., et al. Training language models to follow instructions with human feedback. Advances in
neural information processing systems 35, 27730–27744 (2022).
37. Wei, J., Bosma, M., Zhao, V ., Guu, K., Yu, A. W., Lester, B., Du, N., Dai, A. M. & Le, Q. V . Finetuned
Language Models are Zero-Shot Learners in International Conference on Learning Representations (2022).
https://openreview.net/forum?id=gEZrGCozdqR.
19

[PAGE 20]
Automatic “Differentiation” via Text
38. Yuksekgonul, M., Chandrasekaran, V ., Jones, E., Gunasekar, S., Naik, R., Palangi, H., Kamar, E. &
Nushi, B. Attention Satisfies: A Constraint-Satisfaction Lens on Factual Errors of Language Models in The
Twelfth International Conference on Learning Representations (2024). https://openreview.net/forum?
id=gfFVATffPd.
39. Abdin, M. I., Gunasekar, S., Chandrasekaran, V ., Li, J., Yuksekgonul, M., Peshawaria, R. G., Naik, R.
& Nushi, B. KITAB: Evaluating LLMs on Constraint Satisfaction for Information Retrieval in The Twelfth
International Conference on Learning Representations (2024). https : / / openreview . net / forum ? id =
b3kDP3IytM.
40. Polyak, B. T. Some methods of speeding up the convergence of iteration methods. USSR Computa-
tional Mathematics and Mathematical Physics 4, 1–17 (1964).
41. Sutskever, I., Martens, J., Dahl, G. & Hinton, G. On the importance of initialization and momentum in deep
learning in International conference on machine learning (2013), 1139–1147.
42. Sun, Y., Wang, X., Liu, Z., Miller, J., Efros, A. & Hardt, M. Test-Time Training with Self-Supervision
for Generalization under Distribution Shifts in Proceedings of the 37th International Conference on Machine
Learning (PMLR, 2020). https://proceedings.mlr.press/v119/sun20b.html.
43. Sun, Y., Li, X., Dalal, K., Hsu, C., Koyejo, S., Guestrin, C., Wang, X., Hashimoto, T. & Chen, X. Learning
to (learn at test time). arXiv preprint arXiv:2310.13807 (2023).
44. Yao, S., Zhao, J., Yu, D., Du, N., Shafran, I., Narasimhan, K. R. & Cao, Y. ReAct: Synergizing Reasoning
and Acting in Language Modelsin The Eleventh International Conference on Learning Representations(2023).
https://openreview.net/forum?id=WE_vluYUL-X.
45. Hendrycks, D., Burns, C., Basart, S., Zou, A., Mazeika, M., Song, D. & Steinhardt, J. Measuring Massive
Multitask Language Understanding in International Conference on Learning Representations(2021). https:
//openreview.net/forum?id=d7KBjmI3GmQ.
46. Kojima, T., Gu, S. S., Reid, M., Matsuo, Y. & Iwasawa, Y. Large language models are zero-shot reason-
ers. Advances in neural information processing systems 35, 22199–22213 (2022).
47. Wei, J., Wang, X., Schuurmans, D., Bosma, M., Xia, F., Chi, E., Le, Q. V ., Zhou, D., et al. Chain-of-
thought prompting elicits reasoning in large language models. Advances in neural information process-
ing systems 35, 24824–24837 (2022).
48. OpenAI. Hello GPT-4o Accessed: 2024-05-18. 2024. https://openai.com/index/hello-gpt-4o/.
49. Liu, P ., Yuan, W., Fu, J., Jiang, Z., Hayashi, H. & Neubig, G. Pre-train, prompt, and predict: A system-
atic survey of prompting methods in natural language processing. ACM Computing Surveys 55, 1–35
(2023).
50. Suzgun, M., Scales, N., Schärli, N., Gehrmann, S., Tay, Y., Chung, H. W., Chowdhery, A., Le, Q.,
Chi, E., Zhou, D. & Wei, J. Challenging BIG-Bench Tasks and Whether Chain-of-Thought Can Solve Them
in Findings of the Association for Computational Linguistics: ACL 2023 (Association for Computational
Linguistics, Toronto, Canada, July 2023). https://aclanthology.org/2023.findings-acl.824.
51. Srivastava, A. et al. Beyond the Imitation Game: Quantifying and extrapolating the capabilities of
language models. Transactions on Machine Learning Research. ISSN : 2835-8856. https://openreview.
net/forum?id=uyTL5Bvosj (2023).
52. Cobbe, K., Kosaraju, V ., Bavarian, M., Chen, M., Jun, H., Kaiser, L., Plappert, M., Tworek, J., Hilton, J.,
Nakano, R., Hesse, C. & Schulman, J. Training Verifiers to Solve Math Word Problems.arXiv preprint
arXiv:2110.14168 (2021).
53. Nicolaou, C. A. & Brown, N. Multi-objective optimization methods in drug design. Drug Discovery
Today: Technologies10, e427–e435 (2013).
54. Hoelder, S., Clarke, P . A. & Workman, P . Discovery of small molecule cancer drugs: successes, chal-
lenges and opportunities. Molecular oncology 6, 155–176 (2012).
55. Kontoyianni, M. Docking and virtual screening in drug discovery. Proteomics for drug discovery: Meth-
ods and protocols, 255–266 (2017).
20

[PAGE 21]
Automatic “Differentiation” via Text
56. Agarwal, S. & Mehrotra, R. An overview of molecular docking. JSM chem 4, 1024–1028 (2016).
57. Trott, O. & Olson, A. J. AutoDock Vina: improving the speed and accuracy of docking with a new
scoring function, efficient optimization, and multithreading.Journal of computational chemistry31, 455–
461 (2010).
58. Ursu, O., Rayan, A., Goldblum, A. & Oprea, T. I. Understanding drug-likeness. Wiley Interdisciplinary
Reviews: Computational Molecular Science 1, 760–781 (2011).
59. Bickerton, G. R., Paolini, G. V ., Besnard, J., Muresan, S. & Hopkins, A. L. Quantifying the chemical
beauty of drugs. Nature chemistry 4, 90–98 (2012).
60. Bender, B. J., Gahbauer, S., Luttens, A., Lyu, J., Webb, C. M., Stein, R. M., Fink, E. A., Balius, T. E.,
Carlsson, J., Irwin, J. J., et al. A practical guide to large-scale docking. Nature protocols 16, 4799–4832
(2021).
61. García-Ortegón, M., Simm, G. N., Tripp, A. J., Hernández-Lobato, J. M., Bender, A. & Bacallado, S.
DOCKSTRING: easy molecular docking yields better benchmarks for ligand design. Journal of chemi-
cal information and modeling 62, 3486–3502 (2022).
62. Khan, F. M., Sperduto, P . W. & Gibbons, J. P .Khan’s Treatment Planning in Radiation Oncology:.(Lippin-
cott Williams & Wilkins, 2021).
63. Webb, S. The physical basis of IMRT and inverse planning. The British journal of radiology 76, 678–689
(2003).
64. Hussein, M., Heijmen, B. J. M., Verellen, D. & Nisbet, A. Automation in Intensity Modulated Radio-
therapy Treatment Planning—a Review of Recent Innovations.British Journal of Radiology91, 20180270.
ISSN : 0007-1285. (2024) (Dec. 2018).
65. Wieser, H.-P ., Cisternas, E., Wahl, N., Ulrich, S., Stadler, A., Mescher, H., Müller, L.-R., Klinge, T.,
Gabrys, H., Burigo, L., et al. Development of the open-source dose calculation and optimization
toolkit matRad. Medical Physics 44, 2556–2568 (2017).
66. Nori, H., Lee, Y. T., Zhang, S., Carignan, D., Edgar, R., Fusi, N., King, N., Larson, J., Li, Y., Liu, W.,
et al. Can generalist foundation models outcompete special-purpose tuning? case study in medicine.
arXiv preprint arXiv:2311.16452 (2023).
67. Shin, T., Razeghi, Y., Logan IV , R. L., Wallace, E. & Singh, S. AutoPrompt: Eliciting Knowledge from
Language Models with Automatically Generated Prompts in Proceedings of the 2020 Conference on Empirical
Methods in Natural Language Processing (EMNLP) (Association for Computational Linguistics, Online,
Nov. 2020), 4222–4235. https://aclanthology.org/2020.emnlp-main.346.
68. Jia, M., Tang, L., Chen, B.-C., Cardie, C., Belongie, S., Hariharan, B. & Lim, S.-N. Visual prompt tuning
in European Conference on Computer Vision (2022), 709–727.
69. Li, X. L. & Liang, P . Prefix-Tuning: Optimizing Continuous Prompts for Generationin Proceedings of the 59th
Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics and the 11th International Joint Conference
on Natural Language Processing (Volume 1: Long Papers) (Association for Computational Linguistics,
Online, Aug. 2021), 4582–4597. https://aclanthology.org/2021.acl-long.353.
70. Chen, X., Zhang, N., Xie, X., Deng, S., Yao, Y., Tan, C., Huang, F., Si, L. & Chen, H. Knowprompt:
Knowledge-aware prompt-tuning with synergistic optimization for relation extraction in Proceedings of the
ACM Web conference 2022 (2022), 2778–2788.
71. Ye, Q., Axmed, M., Pryzant, R. & Khani, F. Prompt engineering a prompt engineer. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2311.05661 (2023).
72. Khattab, O., Santhanam, K., Li, X. L., Hall, D., Liang, P ., Potts, C. & Zaharia, M. Demonstrate-Search-
Predict: Composing Retrieval and Language Models for Knowledge-Intensive NLP. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2212.14024 (2022).
73. Singhvi, A., Shetty, M., Tan, S., Potts, C., Sen, K., Zaharia, M. & Khattab, O. DSPy Assertions: Com-
putational Constraints for Self-Refining Language Model Pipelines. arXiv preprint arXiv:2312.13382
(2023).
21

[PAGE 22]
Automatic “Differentiation” via Text
74. Yang, C., Wang, X., Lu, Y., Liu, H., Le, Q. V ., Zhou, D. & Chen, X. Large Language Models as Optimizers
in The Twelfth International Conference on Learning Representations (2024). https://openreview.net/
forum?id=Bb4VGOWELI.
75. Song, X., Tian, Y., Lange, R. T., Lee, C., Tang, Y. & Chen, Y. Position: Leverage Foundational Models for
Black-Box Optimization 2024. arXiv: 2405.03547 [cs.LG].
76. Liu, T., Astorga, N., Seedat, N. & van der Schaar, M. Large Language Models to Enhance Bayesian Opti-
mization in The Twelfth International Conference on Learning Representations(2024). https://openreview.
net/forum?id=OOxotBmGol.
77. Wang, R., Zelikman, E., Poesia, G., Pu, Y., Haber, N. & Goodman, N. Hypothesis Search: Inductive Rea-
soning with Language Models in The Twelfth International Conference on Learning Representations (2024).
https://openreview.net/forum?id=G7UtIGQmjm.
78. Gao, L., Dai, Z., Pasupat, P ., Chen, A., Chaganty, A. T., Fan, Y., Zhao, V ., Lao, N., Lee, H., Juan, D.-C.
& Guu, K. RARR: Researching and Revising What Language Models Say, Using Language Models in Pro-
ceedings of the 61st Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics (Volume 1: Long Pa-
pers) (Association for Computational Linguistics, Toronto, Canada, July 2023), 16477–16508. https:
//aclanthology.org/2023.acl-long.910.
79. Chen, X., Lin, M., Schärli, N. & Zhou, D. Teaching Large Language Models to Self-Debug in The Twelfth
International Conference on Learning Representations (2024). https : / / openreview . net / forum ? id =
KuPixIqPiq.
80. Shypula, A. G., Madaan, A., Zeng, Y., Alon, U., Gardner, J. R., Yang, Y., Hashemi, M., Neubig, G.,
Ranganathan, P ., Bastani, O. & Yazdanbakhsh, A. Learning Performance-Improving Code Edits in The
Twelfth International Conference on Learning Representations (2024). https://openreview.net/forum?
id=ix7rLVHXyY.
81. Chase, H. LangChain Oct. 17, 2022. https://github.com/langchain-ai/langchain.
82. Liu, J. LlamaIndex https://github.com/jerryjliu/llamaindex. 2022.
83. Schick, T., Dwivedi-Yu, J., Dessì, R., Raileanu, R., Lomeli, M., Hambro, E., Zettlemoyer, L., Cancedda,
N. & Scialom, T. Toolformer: Language models can teach themselves to use tools. Advances in Neural
Information Processing Systems 36 (2024).
84. Press, O., Zhang, M., Min, S., Schmidt, L., Smith, N. & Lewis, M. Measuring and Narrowing the Composi-
tionality Gap in Language Modelsin Findings of the Association for Computational Linguistics: EMNLP 2023
(Association for Computational Linguistics, Singapore, Dec. 2023), 5687–5711.https://aclanthology.
org/2023.findings-emnlp.378.
85. Zelikman, E., Wu, Y., Mu, J. & Goodman, N. STaR: Bootstrapping Reasoning With Reasoningin Advances
in Neural Information Processing Systems(eds Koyejo, S., Mohamed, S., Agarwal, A., Belgrave, D., Cho,
K. & Oh, A.) 35 (Curran Associates, Inc., 2022), 15476–15488. https://proceedings.neurips.cc/
paper_files/paper/2022/file/639a9a172c044fbb64175b5fad42e9a5-Paper-Conference.pdf.
86. Huang, J., Gu, S., Hou, L., Wu, Y., Wang, X., Yu, H. & Han, J. Large Language Models Can Self-Improve
in Proceedings of the 2023 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing(eds Bouamor,
H., Pino, J. & Bali, K.) (Association for Computational Linguistics, Singapore, Dec. 2023). https :
//aclanthology.org/2023.emnlp-main.67.
87. Yang, K., Tian, Y., Peng, N. & Klein, D. Re3: Generating Longer Stories With Recursive Reprompting and
Revision in Proceedings of the 2022 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing (As-
sociation for Computational Linguistics, Dec. 2022). https : / / aclanthology . org / 2022 . emnlp -
main.296.
88. Xie, Y., Kawaguchi, K., Zhao, Y., Zhao, X., Kan, M.-Y., He, J. & Xie, Q. Self-Evaluation Guided Beam
Search for Reasoningin Thirty-seventh Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems(2023). https:
//openreview.net/forum?id=Bw82hwg5Q3.
22

[PAGE 23]
Automatic “Differentiation” via Text
89. Paul, D., Ismayilzada, M., Peyrard, M., Borges, B., Bosselut, A., West, R. & Faltings, B. REFINER:
Reasoning Feedback on Intermediate Representations in Proceedings of the 18th Conference of the European
Chapter of the Association for Computational Linguistics (Volume 1: Long Papers)(Association for Compu-
tational Linguistics, Mar. 2024). https://aclanthology.org/2024.eacl-long.67.
90. Zhao, A., Huang, D., Xu, Q., Lin, M., Liu, Y.-J. & Huang, G. Expel: Llm agents are experiential learners in
Proceedings of the AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence 38 (2024), 19632–19642.
91. Le, H., Chen, H., Saha, A., Gokul, A., Sahoo, D. & Joty, S. CodeChain: Towards Modular Code Generation
Through Chain of Self-revisions with Representative Sub-modules in The Twelfth International Conference on
Learning Representations (2024). https://openreview.net/forum?id=vYhglxSj8j.
92. Robbins, H. & Monro, S. A stochastic approximation method. The Annals of Mathematical Statistics,
400–407 (1951).
93. Lewis, P ., Perez, E., Piktus, A., Petroni, F., Karpukhin, V ., Goyal, N., Küttler, H., Lewis, M., Yih, W.-t.,
Rocktäschel, T., et al. Retrieval-augmented generation for knowledge-intensive nlp tasks. Advances in
Neural Information Processing Systems 33, 9459–9474 (2020).
94. Robert, C. P . & Casella, G. Simulation and the Monte Carlo method. Springer Texts in Statistics, New
York: Springer 2 (1999).
95. Kingma, D. & Ba, J. Adam: A Method for Stochastic Optimization in International Conference on Learning
Representations (ICLR) (San Diega, CA, USA, 2015).
96. Lightman, H., Kosaraju, V ., Burda, Y., Edwards, H., Baker, B., Lee, T., Leike, J., Schulman, J., Sutskever,
I. & Cobbe, K. Let’s Verify Step by Stepin The Twelfth International Conference on Learning Representations
(2024). https://openreview.net/forum?id=v8L0pN6EOi.
97. Schmidhuber, J. Evolutionary Principles in Self-Referential Learning PhD thesis (Technical University of
Munich, 1987).
98. Thrun, S. & Pratt, L. in Learning to Learn 3–17 (Springer, 1998).
99. Finn, C., Abbeel, P . & Levine, S. Model-Agnostic Meta-Learning for Fast Adaptation of Deep Networks in
Proceedings of the 34th International Conference on Machine Learning (2017).
100. RDKit: Open-source cheminformatics http://www.rdkit.org.
101. Hughes, J. P ., Rees, S., Kalindjian, S. B. & Philpott, K. L. Principles of early drug discovery. British
journal of pharmacology 162, 1239–1249 (2011).
102. Wenlock, M. C., Austin, R. P ., Barton, P ., Davis, A. M. & Leeson, P . D. A comparison of physiochemical
property profiles of development and marketed oral drugs.Journal of medicinal chemistry46, 1250–1256
(2003).
103. Knox, C., Wilson, M., Klinger, C. M., Franklin, M., Oler, E., Wilson, A., Pon, A., Cox, J., Chin, N. E.,
Strawbridge, S. A., et al. Drugbank 6.0: the drugbank knowledgebase for 2024. Nucleic Acids Research
52, D1265–D1275 (2024).
104. Berry, M., Fielding, B. & Gamieldien, J. Practical considerations in virtual screening and molecular
docking. Emerging trends in computational biology, bioinformatics, and systems biology, 487 (2015).
105. Birhane, A., Kasirzadeh, A., Leslie, D. & Wachter, S. Science in the age of large language models.
Nature Reviews Physics 5, 277–280 (2023).
106. Nikolova, N. & Jaworska, J. Approaches to measure chemical similarity–a review. QSAR & Combina-
torial Science 22, 1006–1026 (2003).
107. Gaulton, A., Bellis, L. J., Bento, A. P ., Chambers, J., Davies, M., Hersey, A., Light, Y., McGlinchey, S.,
Michalovich, D., Al-Lazikani, B., et al. ChEMBL: a large-scale bioactivity database for drug discovery.
Nucleic acids research 40, D1100–D1107 (2012).
108. Swanson, K., Walther, P ., Leitz, J., Mukherjee, S., Wu, J. C., Shivnaraine, R. V . & Zou, J. ADMET-AI: A
machine learning ADMET platform for evaluation of large-scale chemical libraries. bioRxiv, 2023–12
(2023).
23

[PAGE 24]
Automatic “Differentiation” via Text
109. Xing, L., Li, J. G., Donaldson, S., Le, Q. T. & Boyer, A. L. Optimization of Importance Factors in Inverse
Planning. Physics in Medicine & Biology 44, 2525. ISSN : 0031-9155. (2024) (Oct. 1999).
24

[PAGE 25]
Automatic “Differentiation” via Text
A T EXT GRAD Details
A.1 Variables
Variables are the nodes in the computation graph. Below are the most important attributes of Variables:
1. Value is the unstructured data that the variable contains. Throughout this manuscript, all values are
text data.
2. Role descriptionis an informative string that describes the role of the variable in the computation
graph. We use these roles to let the user inject knowledge into the graph and guide the optimization
behavior. More information is described below.
3. Gradients are the natural language feedback provided by the LLMs during the backward pass. These
describe the changes to make the variable so that the downstream loss can be improved. For an
example backward operation that populates gradients, please read Section A.3.
4. Predecessors are the set of variables that are used to generate a given variable. For instance, if we are
giving an instruction to an LLM and getting a response, the instruction would be the predecessor of
the response. During the backward pass, the gradients on the successor are passed to its predecessors,
to provide guidance around how to improve the downstream objective.
5. Requires gradindicates whether or not the gradients will be populated during the backward pass,
analogous to PyTorch. For instance, if the user does not wish to compute gradients for a question,
then simply write Variable(value=question, requires_grad=False, ...) to indicate this.
Role Description:In TEXT GRAD , each variable has a role description. In particular, this is a string that
describes the role of the variable in the computation graph, such as system prompt to the language model or
prediction by the language model. While sometimes populated automatically, in general role descriptions are
one of the primary ways to inject user knowledge into the optimization process.
Empirically, we find that role descriptions can significantly steer the optimization process. For instance,
setting the role of a prediction to bethe final numerical answer to the language model guides the Textual Gradi-
ent Descent optimizer, that prompts a language model to update the value of the variable using the feed-
back, to update the variable such that it is only a numerical value. In comparison, a role description such as
the reasoning for the solution and the final prediction guides the optimizer to produce the reasoning along with
the final prediction.
Here is an example usage:
1 import textgrad as tg
2
3 system_prompt = tg. Variable (" You will be given a question and think step -by - step .
", requires_grad =True , role_description =" system prompt to the language model that
will be reused across queries ")
4
5 model = tg. BlackBoxLLM ( system_prompt = system_prompt )
Code Snippet 3:An example usage of a role description.
A.2 Backpropagation
The backpropagation algorithm in TEXT GRAD mirrors existing autograd frameworks for deep learning.
See Algorithm 1 for the pseudocode.
A.3 Functions
TEXT GRAD offers several operations where both the forward and backward computations are defined – as
such, these operations are composable. The abstract textgrad.autograd.Function class has two methods:
25

[PAGE 26]
Automatic “Differentiation” via Text
Algorithm 1Backpropagation in TEXT GRAD
1: Input: Variables v ∈ Vin a graph, Loss variableL, Backward Engine (LLM)M that will provide textual
gradients
2: # Initializing gradients
3: for each v ∈ Vdo
4: v.gradients = ∅
5: end for
6: # Topological Sorting
7: Q ← TopologicalSort(G)
8: # Backpropagation
9: for v in Q do
10: # Populate gradients in predecessors
11: for each u ∈ PredecessorsOf(v) do
12: # Here, we are omitting subscript v in f . Semantically, f is the function that
generates v, and ∇f is the backward operation for that function.
13: # Semantically, this provides feedback to the variable u, given how v is produced,
and the feedback we already collected for v.
14: u.gradients.add

∇f

u, v, ∂L
∂v

15: end for
16: end for
forward and backward, mirroring the PyTorch syntax. Each function has to define both of these methods.
Below, we describe a couple of the most used operations in this paper.
LLMCall Function: Currently, the most crucial operation in TEXT GRAD is the call to language models.
Forward mode.The forward mode is simple: We make a call to an LLM, through an API or through the
local machine. When a call is made, all the input variables are registered as the predecessors of the response
from the LLM. For instance, if we ask a question to an LLM using aninstruction and a question variable,
the response variable’s predecessors will be [instruction, question]. When doing the backward pass,
the gradients on the response will be backpropagated to question and instruction.
Backward mode.To ensure the backward function runs smoothly and generally, we add the following
glossary to the system prompt:
Glossary for Backward Mode of the LLMCall function
### Glossary of tags that will be sent to you:
# - <LM_SYSTEM_PROMPT>: The system prompt for the language model.
# - <LM_INPUT>: The input to the language model.
# - <LM_OUTPUT>: The output of the language model.
# - <OBJECTIVE_FUNCTION>: The objective of the optimization task.
# - <VARIABLE>: Specifies the span of the variable.
# - <ROLE>: The role description of the variable.
Using these tags, the LLM is made aware of the objective, the role and the value of the variable to give
feedback to, and the full conversation in the forward mode.
This glossary is provided in the system prompt to the backward engine LLM:
26

[PAGE 27]
Automatic “Differentiation” via Text
System prompt for the backward mode of the LLMCall function
You are part of an optimization system that improves a given text (i.e. the variable). You are the
gradient (feedback) engine. Your only responsibility is to give intelligent and creative feedback
and constructive criticism to variables, given an objective specified in <OBJECTIVE_FUNCTION
</OBJECTIVE_FUNCTION> tags. The variables may be solutions to problems, prompts to lan-
guage models, code, or any other text-based variable. Pay attention to the role description of the
variable, and the context in which it is used. You should assume that the variable will be used in a
similar context in the future. Only provide strategies, explanations, and methods to change in the
variable. DO NOT propose a new version of the variable, that will be the job of the optimizer. Your
only job is to send feedback and criticism (compute ’gradients’). For instance, feedback can be in the
form of ’Since language models have the X failure mode...’, ’Adding X can fix this error because...’,
’Removing X can improve the objective function because...’, ’Changing X to Y would fix the mistake
...’, that gets at the downstream objective.
If a variable is already working well (e.g. the objective function is perfect, an evaluation shows the
response is accurate), you should not give feedback.
{GLOSSARY}
Most of this setup aims to ensure that the user does not have to modify the gradient computation. All
of our experiments in the diverse set of applications are done with the same backward mode.
For instance, an example prompt for the gradient computation looks like the following:
An example backward mode prompt for the LLMCall function
You will give feedback to a variable with the following role: <ROLE> system prompt to a language model </ROLE>. Here
is a conversation with a language model (LM):
<LM_SYSTEM_PROMPT> You will answer a reasoning question. Think step by step. Always conclude the last
line of your response should be of the following format: ’Answer: $VALUE’ where VALUE is a numerical value.
</LM_SYSTEM_PROMPT>
<LM_INPUT> I have a chicken, a frog, a mouse, a cat, two pigs, and two rabbits. How many animals do I have?
</LM_INPUT>
<LM_OUTPUT> To find the total number of animals, we simply add up the number of each type of animal: 1 chicken + 1
frog + 1 mouse + 1 cat + 2 pigs + 2 rabbits = 8 animals.
Answer: 8 </LM_OUTPUT>
This conversation is part of a larger system. The <LM_OUTPUT> was later used as response from the language model.
<OBJECTIVE_FUNCTION>Your goal is to give feedback to the variable to address the following feedback on the
LM_OUTPUT: To improve the runtime of the string-based function that checks if the prediction is correct, consider the
following feedback:
1. **Simplify the Response**: For example, instead of "To find the total number of animals, we simply add (...) + 2 pigs + 2
rabbits = 8 animals. Answer: 8", a more concise response like "Total animals: 8" would be more efficient.
. . .
By implementing these strategies, the response from the language model can be optimized to improve the runtime of the
string-based function that checks if the prediction is correct. </OBJECTIVE_FUNCTION>
We are interested in giving feedback to the system prompt to a language model. Specifically, give feedback to the following
span of text:
<VARIABLE> You will answer a reasoning question. Think step by step. (...) following format: ’Answer: $VALUE’ where
VALUE is a numerical value. </VARIABLE>
Given the above history, describe how the system prompt to a language model could be improved to improve the <OBJEC-
TIVE_FUNCTION>. Be very creative, critical, and intelligent.
Addition Operation In numerical optimization, we have the following:
z = x + y (19)
w = t + z (20)
∂w
∂x = ∂w
∂z
∂z
∂x = ∂w
∂z (21)
27

[PAGE 28]
Automatic “Differentiation” via Text
In numerical derivatives, due to the linearity of addition, we have:
∂ ∑N
i Li
∂x =
N
∑
i
∂Li
∂x . (22)
In particular, the backward function for the addition operation passes the gradients on the output of the
addition operation to its inputs.
In particular, the backward function for the addition operation passes the gradients on the output of the
addition operation to its inputs.
tg.sum(L1, . . . ,LN) = ”{L1}\n{L2}\n . . .{LN }” (23)
Similarly, inTEXT GRAD , we have the tg.sum operation, that lets the gradients (feedback) on the output
variable pass to the input variables.
∂tg.sum(L1, . . . ,LN)
∂x = tg.sum( ∂L1
∂x , . . . ,∂LN
∂x ) = ”{∂L1
∂x }\n . . .{∂LN
∂x }” (24)
where we use + to indicate concatenation.
Use Case: One canonical use case for the addition operation is the batch optimization case. In particular,
we implement minibatch gradient descent when performing prompt optimization (Section 3.3).
A.4 Textual Gradient Descent Implementation
Similar to backward computations, we strive to preserve generality in the implementation of TGD. In par-
ticular, we use the same glossary of tags provided above to inject information to the optimization process.
The current system prompt to the optimizer call is the following:
System prompt for the TextualGradientDescent optimizer.
You are part of an optimization system that improves text (i.e., variable). You will be asked to cre-
atively and critically improve prompts, solutions to problems, code, or any other text-based variable.
You will receive some feedback, and use the feedback to improve the variable. The feedback may
be noisy, identify what is important and what is correct. Pay attention to the role description of the
variable, and the context in which it is used. This is very important: You MUST give your response
by sending the improved variable between <IMPROVED_VARIABLE> improved variable </IM-
PROVED_VARIABLE> tags. The text you send between the tags will directly replace the variable.
{GLOSSARY}
Below is an example prompt to the optimizer:
28

[PAGE 29]
Automatic “Differentiation” via Text
An example prompt to the optimizer
Here is the role of the variable you will improve: <ROLE>system prompt to the language model</ROLE>.
The variable is the text within the following span: <VARIABLE> You will answer a reasoning question. Think step by step.
(...) following format: ’Answer: $VALUE’ where VALUE is a numerical value. </VARIABLE>
Here is the context and feedback we got for the variable:
<CONTEXT>
Here is a conversation:
<CONVERSATION><LM_SYSTEM_PROMPT> You will answer a reasoning question. Think step by step. The last
line of your response should be of the following format: ’Answer: $VALUE’ where VALUE is a numerical value.
</LM_SYSTEM_PROMPT>
<LM_INPUT> I have a carrot, an onion, a stalk of celery, three yams, a garlic, a head of broccoli, and a potato. How many
vegetables do I have? </LM_INPUT>
<LM_OUTPUT> To determine the number of vegetables you have, we need to count each individual vegetable item.
1. Carrot 2. Onion 3. Celery 4. Yams (3 yams) 5. Garlic 6. Broccoli 7. Potato
Counting all the individual vegetable items, we have a total of 7 vegetables.
Therefore, you have 7 vegetables.
Answer: 7 </LM_OUTPUT>
</CONVERSATION>
This conversation is potentially part of a larger system. The output is used as response from the language model
Here is the feedback we got for system prompt to the language model in the conversation:
<FEEDBACK>To improve the structured system prompt for the language model, consider the following feedback:
1. **Clarify the Calculation Process**: - **Current Issue**: The prompt does not explicitly instruct the model to outline each
step of its calculation process. - **Improvement**: Add a directive that requires the model to explicitly state each quantity
and the sum. For example, "Clearly outline each step of your calculation process, stating each quantity and the sum."
2. **Verify Intermediate Steps**: - **Current Issue**: The prompt does not instruct the model to verify each intermediate step.
- **Improvement**: Include a directive for the model to verify each step against known correct values. For example, "Verify
each intermediate step in your calculation to ensure accuracy."
</FEEDBACK>
</CONTEXT>
Improve the variable (system prompt to the language model) using the feedback provided in <FEEDBACK> tags. Send the
improved variable in the following format:
<IMPROVED_VARIABLE>the improved variable</IMPROVED_VARIABLE>
Send ONLY the improved variable between the <IMPROVED_VARIABLE> tags, and nothing else.
B Optimizer Extensions
Batch Optimization
In batch optimization, we use the tg.sum function described above. In particular, gradients propagating
from multiple instances are concatenated together, thus the optimizer sees all of the feedback to a variable
coming from multiple sources.
The syntax is as simple as the following:
1 losses = [ loss_fn ( answer , model ( question )) for question , answer in batch ]
2 total_loss = tg. sum ( losses )
3 total_loss . backward ()
Code Snippet 4:An example use for batch optimization for question answering.
Constrained Optimization with Natural Language Constraints
In TEXT GRAD it is possible use constraints when optimizing variables. These constraints are all defined
as natural language descriptions. For example, one can prompt optimizer to update the variable but to
conclude its response with an answer during the update:
29

[PAGE 30]
Automatic “Differentiation” via Text
Example constrained optimization prompt
You must follow the following constraints:
<CONSTRAINTS>‘The last line of your response should be of the following format: ’Answer: $LETTER’
where LETTER is one of ABCD.”</CONSTRAINTS>
In general, the constraint post-fix is appended to the optimizer’s prompt, where the constraints are
written within the <CONSTRAINTS> {constraint text} </CONSTRAINTS> tags.
In code, the user can simply pass in the constraints to the TGD optimizer:
1 constraints = [" The last line of your response should be of the following format : ’
Answer : \ $LETTER ’ where LETTER is one of ABCD ."]
2 optimizer = TextualGradientDescent ( parameters =[ solution ], constraints = constraints )
Code Snippet 5:An example use for constraints when updating the solution to a problem.
Momentum
TEXT GRAD supports the use of Momentum in the Textual Gradient Descent. In standard SGD momentum
uses a linear combination of past gradients and the most recent one to define a new gradient to update a
variable. Similarly, TEXT GRAD keeps track of past iterations of the variable. This postfix is appended to
the prompt for the optimizer.
1 optimizer = TextualGradientDescent ( parameters =[ solution ], momentum_window =3)
Code Snippet 6: How to enable momentum using 3 previous steps in the TextualGradientDescent
optimizer.
Momentum prompt
Here are the past iterations of this variable:
<PAST_ITERATIONS>{past_values}</PAST_ITERATIONS>
In-Context Examples
In-context examples can be utilized to improve textual gradients and update variables effectively. These ex-
amples serve as references to illustrate the characteristics of optimized variables. When in-context examples
are applied, TEXT GRAD adopts the following prompt to incorporate them:
In-context examples prompt
You must base on the following examples when modifying the {role_description}:
<EXAMPLES>{in_context_examples}</EXAMPLES>"
By leveraging these examples, TEXT GRAD can better understand and implement the properties of op-
timized variables, enhancing the overall optimization process
30

[PAGE 31]
Automatic “Differentiation” via Text
C Code Optimization
C.1 Methodology
Baseline Details.We re-run Reflexion [26] using the code by the authors currently available online. We had
to make minor changes to ensure it ran correctly in our setting but we also contacted the original authors
and ask feedback on our edits to ensure our evaluation was consistent. Moreover, we had to re-extract the
LeetCodeHard [26] dataset using the authors’ pipeline; this means that it is likely that the dataset we are
using in this manuscript is not the same dataset that was used in the Reflexion paper. While this dataset
contains a set of simple tests to check if the code works as expected, the real evaluation in this context is
given by passing the tests on the LeetCode platform.
Reflexion is run with a one shot prompt that is meant to instruct the model on how to provide feedback.
The pipeline run by Reflexion is as follows: given in input a prompt to generate code, a language model
generates a first solution. If this solution passes the local tests, it is then submitted to the LeetCode platform
to be evaluated on harder tests. However, if the solution does not pass the tests, we ask for feedback through
Reflexion and optimize the code. Once again, if the new solution passes the local tests, we submit it to the
LeetCode platform. We do this optimization for 5 iterations.
We ran the experiment 5 times with 5 different seeds and we averaged the results. At each iteration of
optimization, TEXT GRAD makes 1 call to gpt-4o to evaluate the test time loss, 1 call to collect gradients,
and 1 call to update the code snippet. The number of coding problems in LeetCodeHard is 39.
Example Query for LeetCode Hard
def minimumTime(grid: List[List[int]]) -> int:
"""
You are given a ‘m x n‘ matrix ‘grid‘ consisting of non-negative integers where ‘grid[row][col]‘ represents the minimum time
required to be able to visit the cell ‘(row, col)‘, which means you can visit the cell ‘(row, col)‘ only when the time you visit it
is greater than or equal to ‘grid[row][col]‘.
You are standing in the top-left cell of the matrix in the ‘0th‘ second, and you must move to any adjacent cell in the four
directions: up, down, left, and right. Each move you make takes 1 second.
Return the minimum time required in which you can visit the bottom-right cell of the matrix. If you cannot visit the bottom-
right cell, then return ‘-1‘.
Example 1:
Input: grid = [[0,1,3,2],[5,1,2,5],[4,3,8,6]]
Output: 7
Explanation: One of the paths that we can take is the following:
- at t = 0, we are on the cell (0,0).
- at t = 1, we move to the cell (0,1). It is possible because grid[0][1] <= 1.
- at t = 2, we move to the cell (1,1). It is possible because grid[1][1] <= 2.
- at t = 3, we move to the cell (1,2). It is possible because grid[1][2] <= 3.
- at t = 4, we move to the cell (1,1). It is possible because grid[1][1] <= 4.
- at t = 5, we move to the cell (1,2). It is possible because grid[1][2] <= 5.
- at t = 6, we move to the cell (1,3). It is possible because grid[1][3] <= 6.
- at t = 7, we move to the cell (2,3). It is possible because grid[2][3] <= 7.
The final time is 7. It can be shown that it is the minimum time possible.
Example 2:
Input: grid = [[0,2,4],[3,2,1],[1,0,4]]
Output: -1
Explanation: There is no path from the top left to the bottom-right cell.
Constraints:
* ‘m == grid.length‘
* ‘n == grid[i].length‘
* ‘2 <= m, n <= 1000‘
* ‘4 <= m * n <= 105‘
* ‘0 <= grid[i][j] <= 105‘
* ‘grid[0][0] == 0‘
"""
31

[PAGE 32]
Automatic “Differentiation” via Text
D Solution Optimization
D.1 Methodology
For the CoT 0-shot prediction, we use the question template and system prompt released with GPT-4o in
the simple-evals repository. In particular, to closely match their evaluations, we use the ChatGPT system
prompt: You are ChatGPT, a large language model trained by OpenAI, based on the GPT-4 architecture. \n Knowl-
edge cutoff: 2023-12 \n Current date: 2024-04-01" . Further, we use the following template:
Multiple Choice Question Answering Template
Answer the following multiple choice question. The last line of your response should be of the
following format: ’Answer: $LETTER’ (without quotes) where LETTER is one of ABCD. Think step
by step before answering.
{Question}
A) {A}
B) {B}
C) {C}
D) {D}
During optimization, we provide the constraint to the optimizer that the prediction should conclude
with an answer, following the simple-evals repository, through the following constraint description: The
last line of your response should be of the following format: ’Answer: $LETTER’ (without quotes) where LETTER is
one of ABCD..
Evaluation: Similarly, using the practice in the simple-evals repository, we perform string matching to
find the final answer, which is one of the letters ABCD, and compare it to the ground truth answer. GPQA
Diamond subset contains 198 questions. MMLU Machine Learning subset contains 112 questions, and
College Physics subset contains 92 questions. At each iteration of optimization, we make 1 call togpt-4o to
evaluate the test time loss, 1 call to collect gradients, and 1 call to update the solution.
D.2 Prompts
The loss function for this task looks like the following:
Solution Refinement Objective
Below is a multi-choice question and a prediction. You are a critical and creative scientist. Your job
is to investigate the prediction. Critically go through reasoning steps, and see if there is a reason
why the prediction could be incorrect.
Use the Janusian Process, think about whether alternative answers could be true.
Question: {Question}
Answer by the language model: {Solution}
Example Query for GPQA Diamond
What is the concentration of calcium ions in a solution containing 0.02 M stochiometric Ca-EDTA
complex (we assume that the pH is ideal, T = 25 °C). KCa-EDTA = 5x1010.
A) 5.0x10−3 M
B) 1.0x10−2 M
C) 6.3x10−7 M
D) 2.0x10−2 M
32

[PAGE 33]
Automatic “Differentiation” via Text
E Prompt Optimization
E.1 Tasks
Below, we provide an example query for each of the tasks in the prompt optimization section.
Example Query for Word Sorting
Sort the following words alphabetically: List: oakland seaborg jacobi membrane trapezoidal allis
marmot toggle anthology.
Example Query for Object Counting
I have a couch, a bed, a car, a fridge, two tables, an oven, a toaster, and a chair. How many objects
do I have?
Example Query for GSM8k
Amber, Micah, and Ahito ran 52 miles in total. Amber ran 8 miles. Micah ran 3.5 times what Amber
ran. How many miles did Ahito run?
For word sorting and object counting, we obtain the datasets from the BBH repository, and we randomly
split examples into 50 (training)/100 (validation)/100 (test) samples. For GSM8k, we use the splits provided
in DSPy [10] which has 200 (training)/300 (validation)/1319 (test) samples.
Evaluation: For object counting and GSM8k, we use the string-based exact match metric, which looks
at the last numerical value provided in the answer, and compares it to the ground truth answer. For word
sorting, we promptgpt-4o to compare the ground truth list to the response provided in the answer, through
the following prompt:
Evaluation system prompt for Word Sorting evaluation
System Prompt:Below is a question from a question-answering task, the ground truth answer, and
reasoning with the final prediction. Is the final prediction correct, i.e. the same as the ground truth
answer? Say only 1 (yes) or 0 (no). Return your response within <ACCURACY> </ACCURACY>
tags. e.g.<ACCURACY> 0 </ACCURACY> or <ACCURACY> 1 </ACCURACY>.
Example prompt:
**Question for the task:** {question}
**Ground truth answer:** {answer}
**Reasoning and prediction from the language model:** {prediction}
F Molecule Optimization
F.1 Docking and Druglikeness Evaluation
To optimize molecules, we evaluate the binding affinity and druglikeness of chemical structures encoded
as SMILES strings. To compute both metrics, the generated SMILES string is first converted into an octet-
complete Lewis dot structure using RDKit’sMolFromSmiles functionality. This method “sanitizes” molecules
by adding explicit hydrogens, kekulizing aromatic rings, standardizing valence states, and assigning rad-
icals [100]. If this sanitization process fails at any step, whether through a structural ambiguity or an in-
valid molecule, the QED and Vina scores are replaced with a single string informing TEXT GRAD that the
molecule is invalid.
33

[PAGE 34]
Automatic “Differentiation” via Text
If the generated SMILES string does represent a valid chemical structure, we compute the QED score
using RDKit’s Chem.QED function. While QED scores can be quickly and reliably computed, docking scores
can vary significantly depending on target and ligand structure preparation. To ensure consistency, we
calculate Vina scores using the DOCKSTRING package [61], which implements a standardized docking
workflow and provides a set of gold-standard targets. In particular, after the ligand has been sanitized
by RDKit, DOCKSTRING (de)-protonates it at pH 7.4 using Open Babel, and prepares and refines the 3D
geometric structure using the Euclidean distance geometry algorithm ETKG and the classical force field
MMFF94. Finally, Gasteiger charges are computed for all ligand atoms, and the resulting structure is saved
as a ligand PDBQT file passed to Autodock Vina. For target preparation, the DOCKSTRING benchmark
suite provides 58 curated crystal structures of clinically relevant proteins, with the majority at less than 2.5
Å resolution. These structures are specially prepared to improve correlations between theoretical and ex-
perimental binding affinities, for example by manual addition of polar hydrogens and removal of residual
water and solute molecules. DOCKSTRING also standardizes simulation parameters such as numerical
seeds, search box coordinates, and sampling exhausitivity, to ensure reproducible scoring.
F.2 Objective Functions
Once the scores have been computed, they are passed to an LLM in the following format.
Molecule Optimization Prompt
Given a docking and a druglikeness score, and a molecule as a SMILES string provide a short
criticism to improve the druglikeness of this molecule and its binding affinity with the protein
{protein_name}. For docking, lower is better (less than −10 is considered good) and for druglike-
ness, 1 is the best and 0 is the worst (greater than 0.8 is considered good). In terms of prioritization,
the docking score is { vina_qed_ratio} times as important as the druglikeness score. Make sure
your criticism is very succinct and to the point.
# if smiles_string is valid
SMILES: {smiles_string}, Docking: {Vina}, Druglikeness: {QED}
# if smiles_string is invalid
SMILES: {smiles_string}, This molecule is invalid.
Note that this prompt allows us to specify both the target name as well as a prioritization between these
two objectives. When optimizing promising molecules in late stage drug discovery, medicinal chemists use
detailed structural knowledge about a protein target’s binding pocket in addition to docking scores, for ex-
ample through interactive 3D molecular visualization software. To preserve the generality ofTEXT GRAD in
our experiments, we do not to attempt to provide similar geometric information, as not all LLMs support
multimodal inputs. However, we do include the protein_name in the loss prompt to inject supplementary
structural information.
In practice, drug efficacy is typically a higher priority than absorbtion efficiency [101, 102], so we set
the vina_qed_ratio to be 10. Empirically, we observe that by scaling this prioritization factor, we can tune
TEXT GRAD ’s generation towards molecules with differing binding affinity and druglikness tradeoffs. This
prioritization also allows us to simplify post-hoc selection and ranking of the generated molecules with a
single “overall” score defined as follows, where a lower overall score soverall indicates a better molecule.
soverall(molecule, protein) =Vina(molecule, protein) + (1 − QED(molecule)) (25)
Since the QED score is bounded between 0 and 1, and the Vina score typically ranges between −3.0 to
−12.0 kcal/mol, this overall score places approximately 10 times more emphasis on binding affinity than
druglikeness.
34

[PAGE 35]
Automatic “Differentiation” via Text
F.3 Benchmarks
To benchmark the performance of TEXT GRAD generated molecules, we compare their characteristics to
clinically approved drugs for the same protein targets found in DrugBank, a database of 16, 619 drugs
[103]. To ensure that the DrugBank molecules were both comparable and high quality, we filtered for drugs
that were small molecules, had full clinical approval, and were designed for orthosteric binding with the
same active site in the DOCKSTRING benchmark suite. After these filtering criteria, we identified 118
drugs targeting 29 of the 58 DOCKSTRING proteins. When evaluating binding affinity and druglikeness
for the clinically approved drugs, we compute the Vina and QED scores using the same tools and workflow
described in section F.1, exactly as applied to the TEXT GRAD molecules.
F.4 Initialization
0.0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1.0
druglikeness (QED)
-11
-10
-9
-8
-7
-6
-5
-4
-3
-2
binding affinity (vina score)
acetamide
pentane
benzene
Supplementary Figure 1: Molecule Initialization. We initialize TEXT GRAD with fragment molecules from
three, diverse functional groups and optimize each initial molecule for 10 iterations for all 58 targets in the
DOCKSTRING benchmark suite. For each fragment and each protein, we perform post selection on the
generated molecules using the summary score outlined in equation 25 and visualize the resulting distribu-
tion. We observe that while the initial QED and Vina score distributions of the starting fragments varies
greatly, the distribution of the optimized molecules is highly overlapping.
In practice, molecular optimization is typically accelerated by large scale pre-optimization screening,
where libraries of millions or even billions of existing chemical structures are scored and ranked by docking,
druglikeness, and other metrics. Only the most promising structures, termed "leads", are further refined
by medicinal chemists [104]. While TEXT GRAD is capable of optimizing any initial molecule, in this work,
to more accurately characterize it’s performance and avoid biasing its designs towards existing drugs, we
instead select our three initial molecules from simple fragments of common functional groups, shown in
Figure 1. These fragments are highly diverse, and belong to different functional groups. Although these
initial fragments have differing druglikness and binding affinity characteristics, the impact of the starting
fragment on TEXT GRAD ’s performance is minimal, and TEXT GRAD is capable of generating molecules
with high druglikeness and binding affinity from all three fragments.
35

[PAGE 36]
Automatic “Differentiation” via Text
F.5 Chemical Novelty
0 2 4 6 8
Iteration
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0CHEMBL Novelty Proportion
0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8
DrugBank Tversky Similarity
0.00
0.01
0.02
0.03
0.04
0.05
0.06Proportion
0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8
DrugBank Tversky Similarity
-11
-10
-9
-8
-7
-6Overall Score
Pearson r: 0.132
TextGrad
Most similar 
approved 
drug
PPARG ADBR1 PGR
vina = -7.0, QED = 0.735
Tversky sim = 0.18
vina = -9.0, QED = 0.818
Tversky sim = 0.39
vina = -9.0, QED = 0.824
Tversky sim = 0.63
Mesalazine
vina = -6.0, QED = 0.409
Carteolol
vina = -9.0, QED = 0.772
Ulipristal
vina = -5.7, QED = 0.731
a b c
d
Supplementary Figure 2: Structural NoveltyIn panel (a), we observe increasing novelty over optimization
updates, where a generated molecule is considered“novel” if there does not exist any existing molecule in
ChEMBL with a Tanimoto similarity score greater than 0.8. In panels (b,c,d), we estimate substructure
similarity using the Tversky metric between TEXT GRAD molecules and clinically approved drugs for each
target. While there are a wide range of similarity scores, we observe that similarity with known drugs has
little correlation with molecule performance, suggesting that TEXT GRAD ’s generation process is weakly
influenced by “memorized” knowledge of clinically approved structures.
One of the primary concerns with using LLM models in scientific discovery is their capacity to sim-
ply memorize and regurgitate their training sets instead of performing logical reasoning [105]. Since re-
cent models like gpt-4o are trained on massive, opaque datasets, a key concern is that the molecules
TEXT GRAD generates may simply be duplicates of clinically approved molecules for their respective tar-
gets. To quantify and test the extent or existence of this “memorization” effect, we compare the molecules
that TEXT GRAD generates with approved drugs for their respective protein targets, as well as unrelated
but existing druglike chemical compounds.
We first compare TEXT GRAD generated molecules for a particular protein target with all the clinically
approved small molecules found in Drugbank for the same target (see F.3 for filtering criteria) using the
Tversky similarity score on RDKit daylight chemical fingerprints. The Tversky similarity score is not sym-
metric, and compares substructures between a variant and reference molecule [106]. In our application, this
is preferred as it assigns a high score to generated (variant) molecules that contain most or all of the sub-
36

[PAGE 37]
Automatic “Differentiation” via Text
structures in the Drugbank (reference) molecule, even if there exist other extraneous substructures in the
generated molecule that reduce the symmetric overlap between the two molecules. A Tversky score of 1.0
indicates that the TEXT GRAD molecule is a complete subset of the Drugbank molecule, while 0.0 indicates
no overlap.
In order to analyze the most relevant chemical structures, we restricted our analysis to a set of high per-
forming TEXT GRAD molecules, rather than all molecules from all iterations. In particular, using the overall
score described in Equation 25, we selected the best molecule for each protein target and for each initial
fragment, for a total of 87 generated molecules (29 druggable targets x 3 initial fragments) and 118 clini-
cally approved drugs across 29 targets. For each target, we compute all pairwise Tversky scores between
the 3 TEXT GRAD molecules and the Drugbank molecules approved for that target, setting the Drugbank
molecule as the reference, and the TEXT GRAD molecule as the variant.
We observed that the distribution of Tversky similarity scores was quite broad, with a median of 0.42 but
ranging from 0.14 to 0.90 (Figure 2(b)). However, we observe that Tversky similarity betweenTEXT GRAD and
DrugBnak molecules is actually slightly anti-correlated with molecule performance as measured by the
overall score, suggesting that TEXT GRAD ’s optimization procedure is at best weakly influenced by prior
knowledge of approved drugs. In fact, for a variety of generated molecules along a gradient of similarity
scores, the generated molecules exhibit QED and Vina scores that match or even exceed their DrugBank
counterparts (Figure 2 (d)).
Beyond the similarity to known drugs, we are also interested in observing if TEXT GRAD is generating
novel molecules, or discovering previously unknown properties in existing compounds, for example a
strong binding affinity to a protein target in a compound that has not been associated with the protein. To
answer this question, we perform a Tanimoto similarity search across all of ChEMBL, a manually curated
database of 2.4 million bioactive molecules with drug-like properties [107]. Unlike the Tversky score, the
Tanimoto metric measures the symetric overlap between two chemical structures, where 1.0 indicates an
exact match, and 0.0 no overlap. We classify a TEXT GRAD compound as “novel” if and only if there does
not exist any molecule in ChEMBL with a with a Tanimoto similarity score over 0.80.
While the starting fragments are known molecules, we observe that as the number of iterations in-
creases, TEXT GRAD generates molecules that are progressively less likely to be previously known com-
pounds. By the 6th iteration, 95% of all the molecules generated by TEXT GRAD across all 58 targets and 3
starting fragments are novel using the criteria above (Figure 2 (a)). By observing the trajectories of gener-
ated molecules and analyzing the textual gradients, we hypothesize that the feedback provided by the Vina
and QED scores encourages TEXT GRAD to explore chemical space beyond known molecules by progres-
sively adding and removing combinations of functional groups. Since these chemical updates can form a
combinatorial number of unique structures, it is reasonable thatTEXT GRAD would reach previously unex-
plored regions of chemical space in a relatively small number of iterations.
F.6 Implicit Objectives
Another key concern in applying LLMs in science is their propensity for hallucinations, where models
generate factually incorrect or illogical responses while attempting to satisfy user requests [105]. In our set-
ting, this hallucinations could manifest by TEXT GRAD proposing invalid, toxic, or otherwise undesirable
molecules in order to optimize its objective function. We control for severe hallucinations by preprocessing
molecules using RDKit sanitization, ensuring at the bare minimum that TEXT GRAD generates chemically
valid molecules. However, this simple preprocessing step does not completely specify desirable chem-
ical behavior. A direct strategy would be to exhaustively encode all possible metrics for desirability in
drug molecules beyond druglikeness and binding affinity into the objective function, and extend it to in-
clude sythesizability, toxicity, among other criteria. Unfortunately, this approach is not realistically feasible
as not all criteria for desirability have mature computational metrics. Thus, a key question is whether
TEXT GRAD obeys so-called implicit objectives during its optimization process that curtails illogical or un-
desirable behavior.
To evaluate the extent or existence of undesirable molecules, we can characterize the harmfulness of the
generated molecules, focusing on mutagenisis and clinical toxicity. Mutagenicity refers to the ability of a
drug to induce genetic alterations, which may lead to DNA damage and harmful long-term affects. Clinical
toxicity refers to a broad range of adverse short or long-term side effects. Importantly, neither druglikeness
37

[PAGE 38]
Automatic “Differentiation” via Text
0.0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1.0
0.00
0.05
0.10
0.15
0.20
0.25Proportion
Predicted Mutagenicity
0.0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1.0
0.00
0.05
0.10
0.15
0.20
0.25Proportion
Predicted Clinical Toxicity
DrugBankTextGrad
Supplementary Figure 3: Safety Properties We evaluate the predicted harmfullness of
TEXT GRAD molecules using the ADMET-AI model and compare them to clinically approved drugs.
For both mutagenicity and clinical toxicity, 1.0 indicates a highly likelihood for harm and 0.0 a low
likelihood. We observe that despite the fact that neither of these characteristics are directly encoded into
TEXT GRAD ’s objective function, TEXT GRAD implicitly avoids proposing harmful molecules.
nor binding affinity are strongly correlated with these criteria, and thus these desirability metrics are not
directly optimized or otherwise explicitly encoded in TEXT GRAD ’s objectives.
To evaluate the propensity for mutagenisis and clinical toxicity, we employ the ADMET-AI model, that
predicts these scores from the chemical structures of molecules [108]. ADMET-AI employs a deep learning
model trained on multiple relevant datasets. In particular, for mutagenicity, ADMET-AI is trained on 7, 255
drugs from the Ames dataset, a bacterial reverse mutation assay for rapidly screening large numbers of
compounds for can induced genetic damage and frameshift mutations. A predicted label of 1.0 indicates
a high likelihood that the drug will induce mutagenesis, while a label of 0.0 indicates a low likelihood.
For clinical toxicity, ADMET-AI is trained on the ClinTox dataset, a dataset of 1, 484 drugs consisting of
molecules that have failed clinical trials for toxicity reasons and also drugs that are associated with success-
ful trials. Similarly, a predicted label of 1.0 indicates a high likelihood of clinical toxicity, while a label of 0.0
indicates a low likelihood.
Once again, we restrict our analysis to the best performing generated molecules with druggable tar-
gets as measured by the overall score, and select the best molecule for each protein target and for each
initial fragment, for a total of 87 generated molecules. We then compare their predicted mutagenisis and
clinical toxicity to the the 118 clinically approved molecules from DrugBank. We observe that for both Mu-
tagenicity and Clinical Toxicity, the molecules generated by TEXT GRAD have predicted distributions that
indicate a low likelihood of harmful effects, and closely match the distributions of the clinically approved
molecules. Together, these results suggest thatTEXT GRAD implicitly avoids proposing harmful molecules,
even though these criteria are not directly encoded in its loss function.
G Treatment Plan Optimization
G.1 Prompts
Radiotherapy treatment plan evaluation can based on various dimensions, therefore there is no single score
that can indicate the quality of plans. We adopt LLM to compute the “loss” by prompting it to assess the
plan quality with clinical protocols. Specifically, LLM is used to compare each protocol with the current
plan and produce the final assessment.
38

[PAGE 39]
Automatic “Differentiation” via Text
Treatment Plan Loss Prompt
Please act as an impartial and objective professional radiation oncologist. Your job is to evaluate
the quality of radiation therapy treatment plans based on their dose volume histogram. You should
consider the following protocols:
<Clinical Protocols>
Note that the order above does not indicate priority; always prioritize the regions that have protocols
that are more significantly violated.
Here is the dose-volume histograms of the candidate plans for evaluation; each entry in the dose-
volume histograms (DVH) table indicates the percentage of volume receiving a dose higher than a
certain Gy (specified in the first column).
<DVH table>
We also provide the statistics of the above DVH table for ease of evaluation.
<DVH statistics>
Now, based on the protocols, and the DVH, please evaluate the plans. Avoid any positional biases
and ensure that the order in which the responses are presented does not influence your decision. Be
as objective as possible. Your answer must:
1. (Evidence) Extract the corresponding entries from the DVH table based on the factors to con-
sider.
2. (Interpretation) Based on the extracted entries from DVH table, interpret them as:
{percentage}% of volume encompassing the dose more than {dose} Gy for {organ}.
3. (Analysis) Combine the interpretation and the factors, analyze whether each of the numerical
factors are met.
Based on the analysis on DVH tables, you need to produce a final evaluation. When all factors are
satisfied, you should always answer no improvement is needed. If improvements are required,
please provide suggestions on where to improve. Please ensure to follow the format below to return
the evaluation results:
<FINAL> Decision: [The plan does/doesn’t need to be improved.] Reasons: [list all factors
that are not satisfied with detailed reasons, e.g. protocol X on (PTV/rectum/bladder/fh/body) is
not satisfied because ...] </FINAL>
The final answer in the end must strictly follow the format above.
G.2 Inner-loop optimization for treatment planning
We employ a two-loop optimization approach [109], which includes (i) an inner loop for inverse planning
and (ii) an outer loop for optimizing the hyperparameters of the inner loop. The inner loop focuses on
traditional fluence map optimization, seeking to determine the optimal fluence map x by minimizing a
cost function that combines multiple weighted objectives for various targets and organs at risk. This cost
function is defined as:
minx
Nt
∑
t=1
wt([Kx]t − dt)2 +
Ns
∑
s=1
wsΘ([Kx]s − ds)([Kx]s − ds)
s.t. D95([Kx]t) =dt,
x ≥ 0,
(26)
Here, {wt}Nt
t=1 and {ws}Ns
s=1 are the importance weights (the hyperparameters optimized byTEXT GRAD )
that balance the various objectives for Nt PTV targets and Ns OARs, respectively. K denotes the dose
39

[PAGE 40]
Automatic “Differentiation” via Text
influence matrix, which specifies the dose per fluence unit delivered to each voxel in the volume by each
beamlet. {dt}Nt
t=1 and {ds}Ns
s=1 are the scalar objective doses for each structure. The cost function essentially
penalizes squared deviations from the target objective doses for the PTV targets and penalizes squared
overdosing for the OARs only when doses exceed ds. The Heaviside function Θ is used to ensure the
objective considers only positive values. The minimization is constrained to positive x values and ensures
that D95 — the minimum dose received by 95% of the structure volume — matches the prescribed dose for
the clinical goal. We use matRad [65] with interior point algorithms to solve the inner-loop optimization.
G.3 Additional Experimental Details
Dataset The dataset used in this study comprised imaging and treatment plans for 5 prostate cancer pa-
tients who underwent intensity-modulated radiation therapy (IMRT). Available data for each patient in-
cludes CT scans, delineated anatomical structures, and clinically approved treatment plans obtained via
Eclipse®.
Method As we mentioned in 3.5, TEXT GRAD is used to optimize the hyperparameters (e.g., importance
weights for PTV and OARs) of the inner-loop numerical optimizer that generates the treatment plan. This
optimization is done using a variation of vanillaTEXT GRAD , i.e. “projected gradient descent with momen-
tum updates”.In particular, three prostate cancer treatment plans optimized by clinicians, along with their
corresponding hyperparameters, are provided. These examples guide the updates of the hyperparame-
ters. This procedure can be viewed as an analogy to projection, as the updated hyperparameters are “softly
projected” onto a feasible set defined by the three in-context examples. Moreover, the historical hyperpa-
rameters and the textual gradients from past iterations, as an analogy to momentum, are also included in
the prompts for updating the hyperparameters. This additional context helps refine the optimization pro-
cess. The optimization will be stopped if the loss suggests all protocols meet, other wise, it will be stopped
if the maximum number of iterations (we set it to 10) is reached.
Initialization The hyperparameters i.e. the importance weights are all initialized at 100 for different or-
gans. The dose objectives are set to 70.20 for PTV , 0.00 for bladder and rectum, and 30.00 for femoral heads
and body, and fixed during optimization.
G.4 Additional Results
In Supplementary Table 1 and 2, we show additional results on comparing TEXT GRAD optimized plan
with clinicians optimized plans.
Supplementary Table 1: PTV dose metrics. Several dose metrics of the PTV target are displayed for all the
clinical and TextGrad optimized plans, including the mean and minimum doses, as well as the D95. For
all the metrics, we include the average deviations from the clinical goal across 5 plans and the standard
deviation in brackets. Values in bold represent the best for each PTV target.
Target Method Mean dose [Gy] Min dose [Gy] Max dose [Gy] D 95 [Gy]
PTV
Clinical Goal 70.20 ≈ 70.20 ≈ 70.20 70.20
Radiation Oncologist +1.97 (0.36) -8.88 (2.31) +4.66 (0.82 ) -0.10 (0.15)
TEXT GRAD +0.51 (0.09) -8.48 (2.38) +3.63 (0.87) +0.00 (0.00)
40

[PAGE 41]
Automatic “Differentiation” via Text
Supplementary Table 2: Organs at Risk (OARs) dose metrics. We show mean dose capturing OAR spar-
ing. Lower values demonstrate better OAR sparing which is desirable, as this number indicates organs
at risk, which should not get more than dosage than what is listed in the clinical guidelines. For all the
metrics, we include the average mean dose across 5 plans and the standard deviation in brackets.
Organ Method Mean dose [Gy] ↓ D5↓ D50↓
Rectum Radiation Oncologist 23.88 (6.45) 64.26 (10.00) 20.04 (5.50)
TEXT GRAD 17.18 (4.2) 58.82 (18.81) 9.54 (0.70)
Bladder Radiation Oncologist 22.39 (5.55) 67.81 (6.44) 14.78 (8.42)
TEXT GRAD 20.92 (0.79) 65.96 (6.96) 14.11 (3.17)
41